<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>2.5 Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bi-vb-pd2-8_root-pli-ms.j. 2.5 Pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2.5.2–8 Tela-madhu-phāṇita-maccha-maṁsa-khīra-dadhiviññāpanasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">2–8. The training rules on asking for oil … honey … syrup … fish … meat … milk … curd </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo telaṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the nuns from the group of six were eating oil that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… madhuṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were eating honey that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… phāṇitaṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were eating syrup that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… macchaṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were eating fish that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… maṁsaṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were eating meat that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… khīraṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were drinking milk that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… were eating curd that they had asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhuniyo dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can nuns eat curd that they have asked for? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kassa sampannaṁ na manāpaṁ, kassa sāduṁ na ruccatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who doesn’t like nice food? Who doesn’t prefer tasty food?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhuniyo tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns heard the complaints of those people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā tā bhikkhuniyo appicchā … pe … tā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjissantī”ti … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six eat curd that they have asked for?” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that those nuns do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma, bhikkhave, chabbaggiyā bhikkhuniyo dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the nuns from the group of six do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjeyya, paṭidesetabbaṁ tāya bhikkhuniyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun asks for curd and then eats it, she must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, ayye, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhunīnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the nuns. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhuniyo gilānā honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards a number of nuns were sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānapucchikā bhikkhuniyo gilānā bhikkhuniyo etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The nuns who were looking after them asked, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kacci, ayye, khamanīyaṁ, kacci yāpanīyan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I hope you’re bearing up? I hope you’re getting better?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbe mayaṁ, ayye, dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjimhā, tena no phāsu hoti;</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously we ate curd that we had asked for, and then we were comfortable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idāni pana ‘bhagavatā paṭikkhittan’ti kukkuccāyantā na viññāpema, tena no na phāsu hotī”ti … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">But now that the Buddha has prohibited this, we don’t ask because we’re afraid of wrongdoing. And because of that we’re not comfortable.” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānāya bhikkhuniyā dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow a sick nun to eat curd that she has asked for. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhuniyo imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddisantu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, the nuns should recite this training rule like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yā pana bhikkhunī agilānā (telaṁ …pe… </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a nun who is not sick asks for (oil … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">madhuṁ …pe… </span></p>
<p class="p3">honey … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">phāṇitaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">syrup … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">macchaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">fish … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">maṁsaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">meat … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khīraṁ …pe…)</span></p>
<p class="p3">milk … ) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjeyya, paṭidesetabbaṁ tāya bhikkhuniyā—</span></p>
<p class="p3">curd and then eats it, she must acknowledge it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘gārayhaṁ, ayye, dhammaṁ āpajjiṁ asappāyaṁ pāṭidesanīyaṁ, taṁ paṭidesemī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I have done a blameworthy and unsuitable thing that is to be acknowledged. I acknowledge it.”’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yā panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā yādisā … pe …</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhunīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Nun: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">… pe … ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippetā bhikkhunīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The nun who has been given the full ordination in unanimity by both Sanghas through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of nun is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Who is not sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā vinā dadhinā phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is comfortable without curd. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is sick: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassā vinā dadhinā na phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">who is not comfortable without curd. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Telaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Oil: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tilatelaṁ sāsapatelaṁ madhukatelaṁ eraṇḍatelaṁ vasātelaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">sesame oil, mustard seed oil, honey tree oil, castor oil, oil from tallow. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Madhu nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Honey: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">makkhikāmadhu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">honey from bees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phāṇitaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Syrup: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ucchumhā nibbattaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">from sugar cane. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maccho nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Fish: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odako vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">what lives in water is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṁsaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Meat: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati tesaṁ maṁsaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the meat of those animals whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khīraṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Milk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gokhīraṁ vā ajikākhīraṁ vā mahiṁsakhīraṁ vā yesaṁ maṁsaṁ kappati tesaṁ khīraṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">milk from cows, milk from goats, milk from buffaloes, or milk from whatever animal whose meat is allowable. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dadhi nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Curd: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaññeva dadhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">curd from those same animals. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā attano atthāya viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick and she asks for herself, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena “bhuñjissāmī”ti paṭiggaṇhāti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When she receives it with the intention of eating it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ajjhohāre ajjhohāre āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">For every mouthful, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā agilānasaññā dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, and she does not perceive herself as sick, and she eats curd that she has asked for, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā vematikā dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, but she is unsure of it, and she eats curd that she has asked for, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Agilānā gilānasaññā dadhiṁ viññāpetvā bhuñjati, āpatti pāṭidesanīyassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is not sick, but she perceives herself as sick, and she eats curd that she has asked for, she commits an offense entailing acknowledgment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā agilānasaññā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, but she does not perceive herself as sick, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā vematikā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, but she is unsure of it, she commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gilānā gilānasaññā anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If she is sick, and she perceives herself as sick, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānā hutvā viññāpetvā agilānā bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she asked for it when she was sick, but eats it when she is no longer sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gilānāya sesakaṁ bhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she eats the leftovers from one who is sick; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of her own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikāyāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if she is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aṭṭhamapāṭidesanīyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The eighth training rule entailing acknowledgment is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddiṭṭhā kho, ayyāyo, aṭṭha pāṭidesanīyā dhammā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, the eight rules on acknowledgment have been recited. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthāyyāyo pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">In regard to this I ask you, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi pucchāmi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time I ask, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kaccittha parisuddhā”?</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Are you pure in this?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisuddhetthāyyāyo, tasmā tuṇhī, evametaṁ dhārayāmīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You are pure in this and therefore silent. I will remember it thus.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunivibhaṅge pāṭidesanīyakaṇḍaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The chapter on offenses entailing acknowledgment in the nuns’ analysis is finished.</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
