<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-ss7_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihārakārasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The training rule on building dwellings </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā kosambiyaṁ viharati ghositārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmato channassa upaṭṭhāko gahapati āyasmantaṁ channaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">a householder who was a supporter of Venerable Channa said to him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāravatthuṁ, bhante, jānāhi ayyassa vihāraṁ kārāpessāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ll have a dwelling built for you, Venerable, if you would find a site for it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā channo vihāravatthuṁ sodhento aññataraṁ cetiyarukkhaṁ chedāpesi gāmapūjitaṁ nigamapūjitaṁ nagarapūjitaṁ janapadapūjitaṁ raṭṭhapūjitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">While Venerable Channa was clearing a site for that dwelling, he felled a tree that served as a shrine and was revered by village, town, district, and kingdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā cetiyarukkhaṁ chedāpessanti gāmapūjitaṁ nigamapūjitaṁ nagarapūjitaṁ janapadapūjitaṁ raṭṭhapūjitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics fell a tree that serves as a shrine and is revered by village, town, district, and kingdom? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekindriyaṁ samaṇā sakyaputtiyā jīvaṁ viheṭhentī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They are hurting one-sensed life.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the criticism of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā channo cetiyarukkhaṁ chedāpessati gāmapūjitaṁ …pe… raṭṭhapūjitan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Channa in the same way. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ channaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking Venerable Channa in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Channa: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, channa, cetiyarukkhaṁ chedāpesi gāmapūjitaṁ …pe… raṭṭhapūjitan”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Channa, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, cetiyarukkhaṁ chedāpessasi gāmapūjitaṁ nigamapūjitaṁ nagarapūjitaṁ janapadapūjitaṁ raṭṭhapūjitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jīvasaññino hi, moghapurisa, manussā rukkhasmiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">People perceive trees as conscious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mahallakaṁ pana bhikkhunā vihāraṁ kārayamānena sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ bhikkhū abhinetabbā vatthudesanāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘When a monk builds a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for himself, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehi bhikkhūhi vatthu desetabbaṁ anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he must have monks approve a site where no harm will be done and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārambhe ce bhikkhu vatthusmiṁ aparikkamane mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kāreyya bhikkhū vā anabhineyya vatthudesanāya, saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a large dwelling on a site where harm will be done and which lacks space on all sides, or he does not have monks approve the site, he commits an offense entailing suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahallako nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A large dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassāmiko vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with a sponsoring owner is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ullitto vā hoti avalitto vā ullittāvalitto vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">plastered inside or plastered outside or plastered both inside and outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Builds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karonto vā kārāpento vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">building it himself or having it built. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sassāmikanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With a sponsoring owner: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">añño koci sāmiko hoti itthī vā puriso vā gahaṭṭho vā pabbajito vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is another owner, either a woman or a man, either a lay person or one gone forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attuddesanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Intended for himself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano atthāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">for his own use. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū abhinetabbā vatthudesanāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He must have monks approve a site: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena vihārakārakena bhikkhunā vihāravatthuṁ sodhetvā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk who is building a dwelling should clear a site, then approach the Sangha, put his upper robe over one shoulder, pay respect at the feet of the senior monks, squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, bhante, mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerables, I want to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for myself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ vihāravatthuolokanaṁ yācāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I request the Sangha to inspect the site for the dwelling.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should make his request a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace sabbo saṅgho ussahati vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ sabbena saṅghena oloketabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the whole Sangha is able to inspect the site, they should all go. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce sabbo saṅgho ussahati vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the whole Sangha is unable to inspect the site, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ye tattha honti bhikkhū byattā paṭibalā sārambhaṁ anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ aparikkamanaṁ jānituṁ te yācitvā sammannitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">then those monks there who are competent and capable—who know where harm will be done and where no harm will be done, and who understands the meaning of having space on all sides and lacking space on all sides—should be asked and then appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, sammannitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, they should be appointed like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so wants to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ vihāravatthuolokanaṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is requesting the Sangha to inspect the site for that dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmañca itthannāmañca bhikkhū sammanneyya itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should appoint monk so-and-so and monk so-and-so to inspect the site. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so wants to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ vihāravatthuolokanaṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is requesting the Sangha to inspect the site for that dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmañca itthannāmañca bhikkhū sammannati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha is appointing monk so-and-so and monk so-and-so to inspect the site. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa ca itthannāmassa ca bhikkhūnaṁ sammuti itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of appointing monk so-and-so and monk so-and-so to inspect the site for the dwelling should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammatā saṅghena itthannāmo ca itthannāmo ca bhikkhū itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ oloketuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has appointed monk so-and-so and monk so-and-so to inspect the site for the dwelling of monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tehi sammatehi bhikkhūhi tattha gantvā vihāravatthu oloketabbaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">The appointed monks should go and inspect the site for the dwelling </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ aparikkamanaṁ jānitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to find out if any harm will be done and if it has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace sārambhaṁ hoti aparikkamanaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If harm will be done and it lacks space on all sides, they should say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māyidha karī”ti vattabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Don’t build here.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace anārambhaṁ hoti saparikkamanaṁ, saṅghassa ārocetabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If no harm will be done and it has space on all sides, they should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anārambhaṁ saparikkamanan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘No harm will be done and it has space on all sides.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena vihārakārakena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk who is building the dwelling should then approach the Sangha, put his upper robe over one shoulder, pay respect at the feet of the senior monks, squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, bhante, mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I want to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for myself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ vihāravatthudesanaṁ yācāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I request the Sangha to approve the site for the dwelling.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should make his request a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should then inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so wants to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ vihāravatthudesanaṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is requesting the Sangha to approve the site for the dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ deseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should approve the site. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu mahallakaṁ vihāraṁ kattukāmo sassāmikaṁ attuddesaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk so-and-so wants to build a large dwelling with a sponsoring owner and intended for himself. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ vihāravatthudesanaṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is requesting the Sangha to approve the site for the dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthuṁ deseti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves the site for the dwelling of monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthussa desanā, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who agrees to approving the site for the dwelling should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who doesn’t agree should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Desitaṁ saṅghena itthannāmassa bhikkhuno vihāravatthu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has approved the site for the dwelling of monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha agrees and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sārambhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Where harm will be done: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kipillikānaṁ vā āsayo hoti, upacikānaṁ vā āsayo hoti, undūrānaṁ vā …pe… ahīnaṁ vā … vicchikānaṁ vā … satapadīnaṁ vā … hatthīnaṁ vā … assānaṁ vā … sīhānaṁ vā … byagghānaṁ vā … dīpīnaṁ vā … acchānaṁ vā … taracchānaṁ vā āsayo hoti, yesaṁ kesañci tiracchānagatānaṁ pāṇānaṁ āsayo hoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is the abode of ants, termites, rats, snakes, scorpions, centipedes, elephants, horses, lions, tigers, leopards, bears, or hyenas, or any other animals; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pubbaṇṇanissitaṁ vā hoti, aparaṇṇanissitaṁ vā hoti, abbhāghātanissitaṁ vā hoti, āghātananissitaṁ vā hoti, susānanissitaṁ vā hoti, uyyānanissitaṁ vā hoti, rājavatthunissitaṁ vā hoti, hatthisālānissitaṁ vā hoti, assasālānissitaṁ vā hoti, bandhanāgāranissitaṁ vā hoti, pānāgāranissitaṁ vā hoti, sūnanissitaṁ vā hoti, racchānissitaṁ vā hoti, caccaranissitaṁ vā hoti, sabhānissitaṁ vā hoti, saṁsaraṇanissitaṁ vā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">or it is bordering on a field of grain, a field of vegetables, a place of slaughter, a place of execution, a charnel ground, a park, a royal property, an elephant stable, a horse stable, a prison, a bar, a slaughterhouse, a street, a crossroads, a public meeting hall, or a cul-de-sac—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṁ sārambhaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “where harm will be done”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparikkamanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Which lacks space on all sides: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkā hoti yathāyuttena sakaṭena anuparigantuṁ, samantā nisseṇiyā anuparigantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not possible to go around it with a yoked cart, or to go all the way around it with a ladder—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṁ aparikkamanaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “which lacks space on all sides”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anārambhaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Where no harm will be done: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kipillikānaṁ vā āsayo hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not the abode of ants … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na saṁsaraṇanissitaṁ vā hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is not bordering on … a cul-de-sac—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṁ anārambhaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “where no harm will be done”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saparikkamanaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Which has space on all sides: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkā hoti yathāyuttena sakaṭena anuparigantuṁ, samantā nisseṇiyā anuparigantuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is possible to go around it with a yoked cart, or to go all the way around it with a ladder—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etaṁ saparikkamanaṁ nāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">this is called “which has space on all sides”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahallako nāma vihāro</span></p>
<p class="p3">A large dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sassāmiko vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one with a sponsoring owner is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihāro nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ullitto vā hoti avalitto vā ullittāvalitto vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">plastered inside or plastered outside or plastered both inside and outside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kāreyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Builds: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karoti vā kārāpeti vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">building it himself or having it built. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū vā anabhineyya vatthudesanāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Or he does not have monks approve the site: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñattidutiyena kammena vihāravatthuṁ na desāpetvā karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if the site has not been approved through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements, and he then builds a dwelling or has one built, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekaṁ piṇḍaṁ anāgate, āpatti thullaccayassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When one piece is left to complete the dwelling, he commits a serious offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tasmiṁ piṇḍe āgate, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When the last piece is finished, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He commits an offense entailing suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati— “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called “an offense entailing suspension”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti adesitavatthukaṁ anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti adesitavatthukaṁ anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti desitavatthukaṁ anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu vihāraṁ karoti desitavatthukaṁ anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monk builds a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling and then departs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca samādisati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he does not tell them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, he commits one offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling and then departs, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca samādisati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he does not tell them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādisati ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He tells them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but they build a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So suṇāti—“vihāro kira me kayirati adesitavatthuko sārambho aparikkamano”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he hears about it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā sāmaṁ vā gantabbaṁ dūto vā pāhetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he must either go there himself or send a message, telling them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho cā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whose site has been approved and where no harm will be done. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu saparikkamano cā”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whose site has been approved and which has space on all sides. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko hotū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">whose site has been approved. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce sāmaṁ vā gaccheyya dūtaṁ vā pahiṇeyya, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he neither goes himself nor sends a message, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādisati ca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He tells them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but they build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So suṇāti—“vihāro kira me kayirati desitavatthuko sārambho aparikkamano”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he hears about it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena bhikkhunā sāmaṁ vā gantabbaṁ dūto vā pāhetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">he must either go there himself or send a message, telling them </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anārambho ca hotu saparikkamano cā”ti</span></p>
<p class="p3">to build one where no harm will be done and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">… (This section is to be expanded as in [Saṅghādisesa 6](pli-tv-bu-vb-ss6:3.9.35--3.11.16).) … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anārambho hotū”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saparikkamano hotū”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">which has space on all sides. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati— “vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādisati ca— “desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He tells them to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ tiṇṇaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, the builders commit three offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, the builders commit two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, the builders commit two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, the builders commit one offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati— “vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samādisati ca— “desitavatthuko ca hotu anārambho ca saparikkamano cā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He tells them to build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If they build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides, the builders commit two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides, the builders commit one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti kārukānaṁ dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides, the builders commit one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati— “vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti adesitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They build a dwelling whose site has not been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce vippakate āgacchati, tena bhikkhunā so vihāro aññassa vā dātabbo bhinditvā vā puna kātabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is unfinished when he returns, that dwelling is to be given to someone else, or it is to be demolished and rebuilt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce aññassa vā dadeyya bhinditvā vā puna kāreyya, āpatti saṅghādisesena dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not give it to someone else, or does not demolish and rebuild it, he commits one offense entailing suspension and two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides … he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesena dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides … he commits one offense entailing suspension and one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides … he commits one offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu samādisitvā pakkamati— “vihāraṁ me karothā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk appoints someone to build him a dwelling and then departs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa vihāraṁ karonti desitavatthukaṁ sārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They build a dwelling whose site has been approved, where harm will be done, and which lacks space on all sides. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So ce vippakate āgacchati, tena bhikkhunā so vihāro aññassa vā dātabbo bhinditvā vā puna kātabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is unfinished when he returns, that dwelling is to be given to someone else, or it is to be demolished and rebuilt. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">No ce aññassa vā dadeyya bhinditvā vā puna kāreyya, āpatti dvinnaṁ dukkaṭānaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not give it to someone else, or does not demolish and rebuild it, he commits two offenses of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where harm will be done, but which has space on all sides … he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ aparikkamanaṁ, āpatti dukkaṭassa …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, but which lacks space on all sides … he commits one offense of wrong conduct. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anārambhaṁ saparikkamanaṁ, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">where no harm will be done, and which has space on all sides … there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, āpatti saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">leṇe guhāya tiṇakuṭikāya</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a shelter, a cave, or a grass hut; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is built for someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsāgāraṁ ṭhapetvā sabbattha anāpatti</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is anything apart from a dwelling; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vihārakārasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on building dwellings, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
