<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-ss9_root-pli-ms.j. Saṅghādisesakaṇḍa - The chapter on offenses entailing suspension </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaduṭṭhadosasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">9. The second training rule on anger </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū gijjhakūṭā pabbatā orohantā addasaṁsu chagalakaṁ ajikāya vippaṭipajjantaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks Mettiya and Bhūmajaka were descending from the Vulture Peak when they saw two goats copulating. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvāna evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said to each other, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa mayaṁ, āvuso, imaṁ chagalakaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ nāma karoma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Let’s give the he-goat the name Dabba the Mallian </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imaṁ ajikaṁ mettiyaṁ nāma bhikkhuniṁ karoma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the she-goat the name Mettiya the nun. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ mayaṁ voharissāma.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We can then say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe mayaṁ, āvuso, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ sutena avocumhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Previously we spoke of what we had heard, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni pana amhehi sāmaṁ diṭṭho mettiyāya bhikkhuniyā vippaṭipajjanto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but now we’ve seen Dabba copulating with the nun Mettiya.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te taṁ chagalakaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ nāma akaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They then gave them those names </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ ajikaṁ mettiyaṁ nāma bhikkhuniṁ akaṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhikkhūnaṁ ārocesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and told the monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“pubbe mayaṁ, āvuso, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ sutena avocumhā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Previously we spoke of what we had heard, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idāni pana amhehi sāmaṁ diṭṭho mettiyāya bhikkhuniyā vippaṭipajjanto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but now we’ve seen Dabba copulating with the nun Mettiya.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks replied, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“māvuso, evaṁ avacuttha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Don’t say such things. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāyasmā dabbo mallaputto evaṁ karissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Venerable Dabba wouldn’t do that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṁ sannipātāpetvā āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ paṭipucchi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha had the Sangha gathered and questioned Dabba: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sarasi tvaṁ, dabba, evarūpaṁ kattā yathayime bhikkhū āhaṁsū”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dabba, do you remember doing as these monks say?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā maṁ, bhante, bhagavā jānātī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable Sir, you know what I’m like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatiyampi kho bhagavā āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time the Buddha asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sarasi tvaṁ, dabba, evarūpaṁ kattā yathayime bhikkhū āhaṁsū”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">the same question </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yathā maṁ, bhante, bhagavā jānātī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and got the same response. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na kho, dabba, dabbā evaṁ nibbeṭhenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He then said, “Dabba, the Dabbas don’t give such evasive answers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace tayā kataṁ katanti vadehi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it was done by you, say so; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace tayā akataṁ akatanti vadehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it wasn’t done by you, then say that.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yato ahaṁ, bhante, jāto nābhijānāmi supinantenapi methunadhammaṁ paṭisevitā, pageva jāgaro”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Since I was born, Sir, I don’t recall having sexual intercourse even in a dream, let alone when awake.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi—“tena hi, bhikkhave, ime bhikkhū anuyuñjathā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well then, monks, call those monks to account.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ vatvā bhagavā uṭṭhāyāsanā vihāraṁ pāvisi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And the Buddha got up from his seat and entered his dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū mettiyabhūmajake bhikkhū anuyuñjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks then questioned Mettiya and Bhūmajaka, who told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te bhikkhūhi anuyuñjīyamānā bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kiṁ pana tumhe, āvuso, āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“So did you charge Venerable Dabba with an offense entailing expulsion, using an unrelated legal issue as a pretext?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evamāvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma mettiyabhūmajakā bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could Mettiya and Bhūmajaka charge Venerable Dabba with an offense entailing expulsion, using an unrelated legal issue as a pretext?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū mettiyabhūmajake bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">They rebuked those monks in many ways and then told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned those monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, dabbaṁ mallaputtaṁ aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁsessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu bhikkhuṁ duṭṭho doso appatīto aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassa kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāya pārājikena dhammena anuddhaṁseyya— ‘appeva nāma naṁ imamhā brahmacariyā cāveyyan’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk who is angry and displeased, uses an unrelated legal issue as a pretext to charge a monk with an offense entailing expulsion, aiming to make him leave the monastic life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato aparena samayena samanuggāhīyamāno vā asamanuggāhīyamāno vā aññabhāgiyañceva taṁ adhikaraṇaṁ hoti koci deso lesamatto upādinno, bhikkhu ca dosaṁ patiṭṭhāti, saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then after some time, whether he is questioned or not, it is clear that the legal issue is unrelated and was used as a pretext, and he admits to his ill will, he commits an offense entailing suspension.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">another monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Duṭṭho dosoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Angry: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kupito anattamano anabhiraddho āhatacitto khilajāto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">upset, dissatisfied, discontent, having hatred, hostile. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appatītoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Displeased: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena ca kopena, tena ca dosena, tāya ca anattamanatāya, tāya ca anabhiraddhiyā appatīto hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">because of that upset, that ill will, that dissatisfaction, and that discontent, he is displeased. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññabhāgiyassa adhikaraṇassāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">An unrelated legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ vā hoti adhikaraṇaññabhāgiyaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is either unrelated in regard to offenses or unrelated in regard to legal issues. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ adhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a legal issue unrelated to a legal issue? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivādādhikaraṇaṁ anuvādādhikaraṇassa āpattādhikaraṇassa kiccādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from a dispute is unrelated to a legal issue arising from an accusation, a legal issue arising from an offense, and a legal issue arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa kiccādhikaraṇassa vivādādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from an accusation is unrelated to a legal issue arising from an offense, a legal issue arising from business, and a legal issue arising from a dispute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattādhikaraṇaṁ kiccādhikaraṇassa vivādādhikaraṇassa anuvādādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from an offense is unrelated to a legal issue arising from business, a legal issue arising from a dispute, and a legal issue arising from an accusation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiccādhikaraṇaṁ vivādādhikaraṇassa anuvādādhikaraṇassa āpattādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from business is unrelated to a legal issue arising from a dispute, a legal issue arising from an accusation, and a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ adhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is in this way that a legal issue is unrelated to a legal issue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ adhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a legal issue related to a legal issue? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vivādādhikaraṇaṁ vivādādhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from a dispute is related to a legal issue arising from a dispute. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ anuvādādhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from an accusation is related to a legal issue arising from an accusation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa siyā tabbhāgiyaṁ siyā aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from an offense may be either related or unrelated to a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a legal issue arising from an offense unrelated to a legal issue arising from an offense? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunadhammapārājikāpatti adinnādānapārājikāpattiyā manussaviggahapārājikāpattiyā uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpattiyā aññabhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse is unrelated to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing, an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being, and an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānapārājikāpatti manussaviggahapārājikāpattiyā uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpattiyā methunadhammapārājikāpattiyā aññabhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing is unrelated to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being, an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality, and an offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussaviggahapārājikāpatti uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpattiyā methunadhammapārājikāpattiyā adinnādānapārājikāpattiyā aññabhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being is unrelated to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality, an offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse, and an offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpatti methunadhammapārājikāpattiyā adinnādānapārājikāpattiyā manussaviggahapārājikāpattiyā aññabhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality is unrelated to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse, an offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing, and an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa aññabhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is in this way that a legal issue arising from an offense is unrelated to a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How is a legal issue arising from an offense related to a legal issue arising from an offense? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Methunadhammapārājikāpatti methunadhammapārājikāpattiyā tabbhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse is related to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to sexual intercourse. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adinnādānapārājikāpatti adinnādānapārājikāpattiyā tabbhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing is related to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to stealing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussaviggahapārājikāpatti manussaviggahapārājikāpattiyā tabbhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being is related to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpatti uttarimanussadhammapārājikāpattiyā tabbhāgiyā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">An offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality is related to an offense entailing expulsion in regard to a superhuman quality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ āpattādhikaraṇaṁ āpattādhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is in this way that a legal issue arising from an offense is related to a legal issue arising from an offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiccādhikaraṇaṁ kiccādhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A legal issue arising from business is related to a legal issue arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṁ adhikaraṇaṁ adhikaraṇassa tabbhāgiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is in this way that a legal issue is related to a legal issue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kiñci desaṁ lesamattaṁ upādāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Uses as a pretext: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">leso nāma dasa lesā— jātileso, nāmaleso, gottaleso, liṅgaleso, āpattileso, pattaleso, cīvaraleso, upajjhāyaleso, ācariyaleso, senāsanaleso.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A pretext: there are ten kinds of pretext—the pretext of caste, the pretext of name, the pretext of family, the pretext of characteristic, the pretext of offense, the pretext of almsbowl, the pretext of robe, the pretext of preceptor, the pretext of teacher, the pretext of dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātileso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of caste: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khattiyo diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees an aristocrat committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ khattiyaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another aristocrat, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“khattiyo mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve a seen an aristocrat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tayā saddhiṁ uposatho vā pavāraṇā vā saṅghakammaṁ vā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re excluded from the observance-day procedure, from the invitation procedure, and from the legal procedures of the Sangha,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brāhmaṇo diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a brahmin … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vesso diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a merchant … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddo diṭṭho hoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a worker </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ suddaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another worker, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“suddo mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve a seen a worker. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāmaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of name: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddharakkhito diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees someone whose name is Buddharakkhita … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhammarakkhito diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dhammarakkhita … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅgharakkhito diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Saṅgharakkhita committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ saṅgharakkhitaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another person called Saṅgharakkhita, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saṅgharakkhito mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen Saṅgharakkhita. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gottaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of family: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gotamo diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees someone whose family name is Gotama … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">moggallāno diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Moggallāna … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaccāyano diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">Kaccāyana … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vāsiṭṭho diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Vāsiṭṭha committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ vāsiṭṭhaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another person called Vāsiṭṭha, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“vāsiṭṭho mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen Vāsiṭṭha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Liṅgaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of characteristic: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīgho diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees someone tall … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasso diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">short … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kaṇho diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">dark-skinned … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">odāto diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">light-skinned committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ odātaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another light-skinned person, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“odāto mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen a light-skinned person. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āpattileso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lahukaṁ āpattiṁ āpajjanto diṭṭho hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees someone committing a light offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of almsbowl: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">lohapattadharo diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees someone carrying a iron bowl … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sāṭakapattadharo diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a black clay bowl … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sumbhakapattadharo diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">an ordinary clay bowl committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ sumbhakapattadharaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another person carrying an ordinary clay bowl, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sumbhakapattadharo mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen someone carrying an ordinary clay bowl. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaraleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṁsukūliko diṭṭho hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees a rag-robe wearer … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gahapaticīvaradharo diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">wearing robes given by householders committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ gahapaticīvaradharaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another person wearing robes given by householders, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gahapaticīvaradharo mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen someone wearing robes given by householders. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upajjhāyaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of preceptor: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthannāmassa saddhivihāriko diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees a student of so-and-so committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ itthannāmassa saddhivihārikaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another student of that person, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“itthannāmassa saddhivihāriko mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen the student of so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ācariyaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of teacher: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthannāmassa antevāsiko diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees a pupil of so-and-so committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ itthannāmassa antevāsikaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses another pupil of that person, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“itthannāmassa antevāsiko mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen the pupil of so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi, assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Senāsanaleso nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The pretext of dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">itthannāmasenāsanavāsiko diṭṭho hoti pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpajjanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk sees one who dwells in such-and-such a dwelling committing an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ itthannāmasenāsanavāsikaṁ passitvā codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses someone else who dwells in that dwelling, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“itthannāmasenāsanavāsiko mayā diṭṭho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“I’ve seen one who dwells in such-and-such a dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikaṁ dhammaṁ ajjhāpannosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’ve committed an offense entailing expulsion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tayā saddhiṁ uposatho vā pavāraṇā vā saṅghakammaṁ vā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re excluded from the observance-day procedure, from the invitation procedure, and from the legal procedures of the Sangha,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pārājikena dhammenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">With an offense entailing expulsion: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catunnaṁ aññatarena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">with one of the four. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuddhaṁseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Charges: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">codeti vā codāpeti vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">accuses him or has him accused. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appeva nāma naṁ imamhā brahmacariyā cāveyyanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To make him leave the monastic life: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhubhāvā cāveyyaṁ, samaṇadhammā cāveyyaṁ, sīlakkhandhā cāveyyaṁ, tapoguṇā cāveyyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to make him leave the monkhood, leave the state of a monastic, leave his morality, leave the virtue of monasticism. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato aparena samayenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">And then after some time: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yasmiṁ khaṇe anuddhaṁsito hoti, taṁ khaṇaṁ taṁ layaṁ taṁ muhuttaṁ vītivatte.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the moment, the instant, the second after he has laid the charge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samanuggāhīyamānoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He is questioned: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yena vatthunā anuddhaṁsito hoti tasmiṁ vatthusmiṁ samanuggāhīyamāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is questioned about the grounds of his charge. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asamanuggāhīyamānoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kenaci vuccamāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he is not spoken to by anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Adhikaraṇaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">The legal issue: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattāri adhikaraṇāni— vivādādhikaraṇaṁ, anuvādādhikaraṇaṁ, āpattādhikaraṇaṁ, kiccādhikaraṇaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are four kinds of legal issues: legal issues arising from disputes, legal issues arising from accusations, legal issues arising from offenses, legal issues arising from business. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Koci deso lesamatto upādinnoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Was used as a pretext: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tesaṁ lesānaṁ aññataro leso upādinno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he has used a certain pretext among those listed above. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu ca dosaṁ patiṭṭhātīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he admits to his ill will: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tucchakaṁ mayā bhaṇitaṁ, musā mayā bhaṇitaṁ, abhūtaṁ mayā bhaṇitaṁ, ajānantena mayā bhaṇitaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What I said was empty,” “What I said was false,” “What I said was unreal,” “I said it without knowing.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghādisesoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He commits an offense entailing suspension: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… tenapi vuccati “saṅghādiseso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… Therefore, too, it is called “an offense entailing suspension”. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti, saṅghādisese saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing suspension, and the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tayā saddhiṁ uposatho vā pavāraṇā vā saṅghakammaṁ vā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re excluded from the observance-day procedure, from the invitation procedure, and from the legal procedures of the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti, saṅghādisese thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing suspension, but the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not a monastic …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu thullaccayaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti thullaccaye thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing a serious offense, and the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thullaccaye pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as a offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not a monastic …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu pācittiyaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti, dubbhāsite dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong speech, and the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsite saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then accuses him of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tayā saddhiṁ uposatho vā pavāraṇā vā saṅghakammaṁ vā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re excluded from the observance-day procedure, from the invitation procedure, and from the legal procedures of the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekekaṁ mūlaṁ kātuna cakkaṁ bandhitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The permutation series is to be linked by doing the items one by one. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti saṅghādisese saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing suspension and the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then has him accused of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not a monastic …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu saṅghādisesaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti, saṅghādisese thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing suspension, but the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then has him accused of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not a monastic …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu thullaccayaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti thullaccaye thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing a serious offense, and the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thullaccaye pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then has him accused of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not a monastic …” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhu pācittiyaṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk sees a second monk committing an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭaṁ …</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong conduct … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsitaṁ ajjhāpajjanto diṭṭho hoti dubbhāsite dubbhāsitadiṭṭhi hoti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">an offense of wrong speech, and the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong speech … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dubbhāsite saṅghādisesadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing suspension … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">thullaccayadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as a serious offense … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pācittiyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing confession … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṭidesanīyadiṭṭhi hoti …</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense entailing acknowledgment … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dukkaṭadiṭṭhi hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">but the first monk regards it as an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañce pārājikena codāpeti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he then has him accused of an offense entailing expulsion, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“assamaṇosi, asakyaputtiyosi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“You’re not an ascetic, not a Sakyan monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">natthi tayā saddhiṁ uposatho vā pavāraṇā vā saṅghakammaṁ vā”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">You’re excluded from the observance-day procedure, from the invitation procedure, and from the legal procedures of the Sangha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evampi āpattaññabhāgiyaṁ hoti leso ca upādinno, āpatti vācāya, vācāya saṅghādisesassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus using an unrelated offense as a pretext, he commits an offense entailing suspension for each statement. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tathāsaññī codeti vā codāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he accuses or has someone accused in accordance with his own perception; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">(Aññabhāgiya) Kiñcilesasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on a (unrelated) pretext, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
