<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np13_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">13. Dvebhāgasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">13. The training rule on two parts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū—“bhagavatā paṭikkhittaṁ suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ santhataṁ kārāpetun”ti, te thokaññeva odātaṁ ante ādiyitvā tatheva suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ santhataṁ kārāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time the monks from the group of six, knowing that the Buddha had prohibited having blankets made entirely of black wool, added just a little bit of white on the edge. In this way they had blankets made entirely of black wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū thokaññeva odātaṁ ante ādiyitvā tatheva suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ santhataṁ kārāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, thokaññeva odātaṁ ante ādiyitvā tatheva suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ santhataṁ kārāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, thokaññeva odātaṁ ante ādiyitvā tatheva suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ santhataṁ kārāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navaṁ pana bhikkhunā santhataṁ kārayamānena dve bhāgā suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ ādātabbā tatiyaṁ odātānaṁ catutthaṁ gocariyānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk is having a new blanket made, he should use two parts of entirely black wool, a third part of white, and a fourth part of brown. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādā ce bhikkhu dve bhāge suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ tatiyaṁ odātānaṁ catutthaṁ gocariyānaṁ navaṁ santhataṁ kārāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has a new blanket made without using two parts of entirely black wool, a third part of white, and a fourth part of brown, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">New: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karaṇaṁ upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">newly made is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santhataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A blanket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santharitvā kataṁ hoti avāyimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is made by strewing, not by weaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārayamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Is having made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karonto vā kārāpento vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">making it himself or having it made. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dve bhāgā suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ ādātabbāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should use two parts of entirely black wool: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dhārayitvā dve tulā ādātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">having weighed it, he should use two measures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyaṁ odātānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third part of white: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulaṁ odātānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one measure of white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Catutthaṁ gocariyānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A fourth part of brown: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulaṁ gocariyānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one measure of brown. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādā ce bhikkhu dve bhāge suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ tatiyaṁ odātānaṁ catutthaṁ gocariyānanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Without using two parts of entirely black wool, a third part of white, and a fourth part of brown: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anādiyitvā dve tule suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ tulaṁ odātānaṁ tulaṁ gocariyānaṁ navaṁ santhataṁ karoti vā kārāpeti vā payoge dukkaṭaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes it, or has it made, without using two measures of entirely black wool, one measure of white, and one measure of brown, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the blanket, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The blanket should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, santhataṁ anādiyitvā dve tule suddhakāḷakānaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ tulaṁ odātānaṁ tulaṁ gocariyānaṁ kārāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this blanket, which I got made without using two measures of entirely black wool, one measure of white, and one measure of brown, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this blanket back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one, or has one made, for someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tulaṁ odātānaṁ tulaṁ gocariyānaṁ ādiyitvā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one using one measure of white and one measure of brown; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahutaraṁ odātānaṁ bahutaraṁ gocariyānaṁ ādiyitvā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one using more than one measure of white and more than one measure of brown; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suddhaṁ odātānaṁ suddhaṁ gocariyānaṁ ādiyitvā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one using just white and just brown; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvebhāgasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ tatiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on two parts, the third, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
