<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np14_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">14. Chabbassasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">14. The training rule on six years </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time monks were having blankets made every year. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They kept on begging and asking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“eḷakalomāni detha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please give wool! </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eḷakalomehi attho”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We need wool!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpessanti, yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharissanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics have blankets made every year, begging and asking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eḷakalomāni detha, eḷakalomehi attho’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please give wool! We need wool!’? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākaṁ pana sakiṁ katāni santhatāni pañcapi chapi vassāni honti, yesaṁ no dārakā uhadantipi ummihantipi undūrehipi khajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We only make blankets for ourselves every five or six years, even though our children defecate and urinate on them and they are eaten by rats.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ime pana samaṇā sakyaputtiyā anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpenti, yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eḷakalomāni detha, eḷakalomehi attho’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpessanti, yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharissanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eḷakalomāni detha, eḷakalomehi attho’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpenti, yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eḷakalomāni detha, eḷakalomehi attho’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā anuvassaṁ santhataṁ kārāpessanti, yācanabahulā viññattibahulā viharissanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘eḷakalomāni detha, eḷakalomehi attho’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navaṁ pana bhikkhunā santhataṁ kārāpetvā chabbassāni dhāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has had a new blanket made, he should keep it for six years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Orena ce channaṁ vassānaṁ taṁ santhataṁ vissajjetvā vā avissajjetvā vā aññaṁ navaṁ santhataṁ kārāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether that blanket has been given away or not, if he has another new blanket made in less than six years, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcidaṁ bhagavatā bhikkhūnaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">In this way the Buddha laid down this training rule for the monks. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro bhikkhu kosambiyaṁ gilāno hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time a certain monk at Kosambī was sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātakā tassa bhikkhuno santike dūtaṁ pāhesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">His relatives sent him a message, saying, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āgacchatu bhadanto mayaṁ upaṭṭhahissāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Come, Venerable, we’ll nurse you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhūpi evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“gacchāvuso, ñātakā taṁ upaṭṭhahissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">urged him to go, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So evamāha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">but he said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā, āvuso, sikkhāpadaṁ paññattaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has laid down a training rule </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘navaṁ pana bhikkhunā santhataṁ kārāpetvā chabbassāni dhāretabban’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that a monk who has had a new blanket made must keep it for six years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahañcamhi gilāno, na sakkomi santhataṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Now because I’m sick, I’m unable to travel with my blanket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mayhañca vinā santhatā na phāsu hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And because I’m not comfortable without it, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nāhaṁ gamissāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I can’t go.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">They told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards he gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, gilānassa bhikkhuno santhatasammutiṁ dātuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow you to give a blanket-permission to a sick monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, dātabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And it should be given like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena gilānena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, the sick monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ahaṁ, bhante, gilāno</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I’m sick. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na sakkomi santhataṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’m unable to travel with my blanket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sohaṁ, bhante, saṅghaṁ santhatasammutiṁ yācāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I ask the Sangha for a blanket-permission.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And he should ask a second </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi yācitabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and a third time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">A competent and capable monk should then inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu gilāno na sakkoti santhataṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so is sick. He’s unable to travel with his blanket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ santhatasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s asking the Sangha for a blanket-permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno santhatasammutiṁ dadeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, the Sangha should give a blanket-permission to monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ itthannāmo bhikkhu gilāno na sakkoti santhataṁ ādāya pakkamituṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monk so-and-so is sick. He’s unable to travel with his blanket. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So saṅghaṁ santhatasammutiṁ yācati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s asking the Sangha for a blanket-permission. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmassa bhikkhuno santhatasammutiṁ deti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha gives a blanket-permission to monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno santhatasammutiyā dānaṁ, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who approves of giving a blanket-permission to monk so-and-so should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who does not approve should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dinnā saṅghena itthannāmassa bhikkhuno santhatasammuti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has given a blanket-permission to monk so-and-so. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">And so, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Navaṁ pana bhikkhunā santhataṁ kārāpetvā chabbassāni dhāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has had a new blanket made, he should keep it for six years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Orena ce channaṁ vassānaṁ taṁ santhataṁ vissajjetvā vā avissajjetvā vā aññaṁ navaṁ santhataṁ kārāpeyya, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whether that blanket has been given away or not, if he has another new blanket made in less than six years, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Navaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">New: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karaṇaṁ upādāya vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">newly made is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santhataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A blanket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santharitvā kataṁ hoti avāyimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is made by strewing, not by weaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārāpetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has had made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">karitvā vā kārāpetvā vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">has made or has had made. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbassāni dhāretabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should keep it for six years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chabbassaparamatā dhāretabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he should keep it for six years at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Orena ce channaṁ vassānanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">In less than six years: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakachabbassāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">fewer than six years. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṁ santhataṁ vissajjetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That blanket has been given away: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññesaṁ datvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has been given to others. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avissajjetvāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Not: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na kassaci datvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it has not been given to anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra bhikkhusammutiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">except if the monks have agreed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā bhikkhusammutiṁ aññaṁ navaṁ santhataṁ karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes another new blanket, or has one made, unless the monks have agreed, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the blanket, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The blanket should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, santhataṁ ūnakachabbassāni kārāpitaṁ, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this blanket, which I got made after less than six years without the agreement of the monks, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this blanket back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chabbassāni karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one after six years; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atirekachabbassāni karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one after more than six years; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes one, or has one made, for the sake of another; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets what was made by another and then uses it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhusammutiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has the permission of the monks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chabbassasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ catutthaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on six years, the fourth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
