<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np11_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">11. Kosiyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">11. The training rule on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā āḷaviyaṁ viharati aggāḷave cetiye.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū kosiyakārake upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six went to the silk-makers and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bahū, āvuso, kosakārake pacatha, amhākampi dassatha,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Please boil a heap of silkworms and give us silk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayampi icchāma kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kātun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We want to make blankets containing silk.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The silk-makers complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā amhe upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vakkhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics come and say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bahū, āvuso, kosakārake pacatha, amhākampi dassatha, mayampi icchāma kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kātun’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">such things to us? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Amhākampi alābhā, amhākampi dulladdhaṁ, ye mayaṁ ājīvassa hetu puttadārassa kāraṇā bahū khuddake pāṇe saṅghātaṁ āpādemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It’s our misfortune that we must kill many small creatures because of our livelihood and because of our wives and children.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those silk-makers, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū kosiyakārake upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vakkhanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six go to silk-makers and say </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bahū, āvuso, kosakārake pacatha, amhākampi dassatha, mayampi icchāma kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kātun’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">such a thing?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking them in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, kosiyakārake upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vadetha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bahū, āvuso, kosakārake pacatha, amhākampi dassatha,</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mayampi icchāma kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kātun’”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, kosiyakārake upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vakkhatha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘bahū, āvuso, kosakārake pacatha, amhākampi dassatha, mayampi icchāma kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kātun’ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kārāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk has a blanket made that contains silk, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santhataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A blanket: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">santharitvā kataṁ hoti avāyimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is made by strewing, not by weaving. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kārāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has made: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekenapi kosiyaṁsunā missitvā karoti vā kārāpeti vā, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes a blanket that contains even one thread of silk, or he has one made, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the blanket, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The blanket should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, kosiyamissakaṁ santhataṁ kārāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this blanket containing silk, which I got made, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this blanket back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attanā vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what he began himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ attanā pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he finishes himself what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parehi vippakataṁ parehi pariyosāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has others finish what was begun by others, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassatthāya karoti vā kārāpeti vā, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes one, or has one made, for someone else, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññena kataṁ paṭilabhitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he gets one that was made by someone else and then uses it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vitānaṁ vā bhūmattharaṇaṁ vā sāṇipākāraṁ vā bhisiṁ vā bibbohanaṁ vā karoti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he makes a canopy, a floor cover, a cloth screen, a mattress, or a pillow; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ paṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on silk, the first, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
