<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np18_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">18. Rūpiyasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">18. The training rule on money </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena āyasmā upanando sakyaputto aññatarassa kulassa kulūpako hoti niccabhattiko.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time Venerable Upananda was associating with a family from which he received a regular meal. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṁ tasmiṁ kule uppajjati khādanīyaṁ vā bhojanīyaṁ vā tato āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa paṭiviso ṭhapiyyati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Whenever that family obtained food, they put aside a portion for Upananda. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena sāyaṁ tasmiṁ kule maṁsaṁ uppannaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And that’s what they did when one evening they obtained some meat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa paṭiviso ṭhapito hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassa kulassa dārako rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhāya rodati—“maṁsaṁ me dethā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The following morning their son got up early and cried, “Give me meat!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso pajāpatiṁ etadavoca—“ayyassa paṭivisaṁ dārakassa dehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The man said to his wife, “Give him the venerable’s portion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññaṁ cetāpetvā ayyassa dassāmā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">We’ll buy something else for the venerable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho āyasmā upanando sakyaputto pubbaṇhasamayaṁ nivāsetvā pattacīvaraṁ ādāya yena taṁ kulaṁ tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā paññatte āsane nisīdi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">On the same morning Upananda robed up, took his bowl and robe, and went to that family, where he sat down on the prepared seat. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso yenāyasmā upanando sakyaputto tenupasaṅkami; upasaṅkamitvā āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ abhivādetvā ekamantaṁ nisīdi. Ekamantaṁ nisinno kho so puriso āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The man of the house approached Upananda, bowed, sat down, and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“hiyyo kho, bhante, sāyaṁ maṁsaṁ uppannaṁ ahosi. Tato ayyassa paṭiviso ṭhapito.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yesterday evening, Venerable, we obtained some meat, and we put aside a portion for you. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṁ, bhante, dārako rattiyā paccūsasamayaṁ paccuṭṭhāya rodati—‘maṁsaṁ me dethā’ti. Ayyassa paṭiviso dārakassa dinno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But then in the morning our son got up early and cried, ‘Give me meat!’ and we gave him your portion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kahāpaṇena, bhante, kiṁ āhariyyatū”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">What can we get you for a _kahāpaṇa_?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pariccatto me, āvuso, kahāpaṇo”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Are you giving up a _kahāpaṇa_ coin for me?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Āma, bhante, pariccatto”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Yes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Taññeva me, āvuso, kahāpaṇaṁ dehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Then just give me that _kahāpaṇa_.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so puriso āyasmato upanandassa sakyaputtassa kahāpaṇaṁ datvā ujjhāyati khiyyati vipāceti—“Yatheva mayaṁ rūpiyaṁ paṭiggaṇhāma evamevime samaṇā sakyaputtiyā rūpiyaṁ paṭiggaṇhantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After giving a _kahāpaṇa_ to Upananda, that man complained and criticized him, “The Sakyan monastics accept money just as we do.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tassa purisassa ujjhāyantassa khiyyantassa vipācentassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of that man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized him,” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma āyasmā upanando sakyaputto rūpiyaṁ paṭiggahessatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can Venerable Upananda receive money?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū āyasmantaṁ upanandaṁ sakyaputtaṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking him in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned Upananda: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, upananda, rūpiyaṁ paṭiggahesī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, Upananda, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, rūpiyaṁ paṭiggahessasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu jātarūparajataṁ uggaṇheyya vā uggaṇhāpeyya vā upanikkhittaṁ vā sādiyeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk takes, has someone else take, or consents to gold and silver being deposited for him, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jātarūpaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Gold: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">satthuvaṇṇo vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">that which has the color of the Teacher is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rajataṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Silver: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kahāpaṇo lohamāsako dārumāsako jatumāsako ye vohāraṁ gacchanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a _kahāpaṇa_ coin, a copper _māsaka_ coin, a wooden _māsaka_ coin, a resin _māsaka_ coin—whatever is used in commerce. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaṇheyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Takes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ gaṇhāti nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes it himself, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uggaṇhāpeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Has someone else take: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ gāhāpeti nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has another take it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upanikkhittaṁ vā sādiyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Consents to … being deposited for him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ ayyassa hotūti upanikkhittaṁ sādiyati, nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if someone says, “This is for you,” and he consents to it being deposited for him, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅghamajjhe nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It should be relinquished in the midst of the Sangha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tena bhikkhunā saṅghaṁ upasaṅkamitvā ekaṁsaṁ uttarāsaṅgaṁ karitvā vuḍḍhānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ pāde vanditvā ukkuṭikaṁ nisīditvā añjaliṁ paggahetvā evamassa vacanīyo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">After approaching the Sangha, that monk should put his upper robe over one shoulder and pay respect at the feet of the senior monks. He should then squat on his heels, raise his joined palms, and say: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“ahaṁ, bhante, rūpiyaṁ paṭiggahesiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, I have received money. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idaṁ me nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">It is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitvā āpatti desetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">After relinquishing it, he is to confess the offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena āpatti paṭiggahetabbā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The confession should be received by a competent and capable monk. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace tattha āgacchati ārāmiko vā upāsako vā so vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If a monastery worker or a lay follower is available, you should tell him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso, imaṁ jānāhī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Look into this.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so bhaṇati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he says, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“iminā kiṁ āhariyyatū”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“What can I get you with this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should not say, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imaṁ vā imaṁ vā āharā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Get this or that;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kappiyaṁ ācikkhitabbaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">one should point out what is allowable: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sappi vā telaṁ vā madhu vā phāṇitaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">ghee, oil, honey, or syrup. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so tena parivattetvā kappiyaṁ āharati rūpiyappaṭiggāhakaṁ ṭhapetvā sabbeheva paribhuñjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he makes a purchase and brings back what is allowable, everyone may enjoy it except the one who received the money. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañcetaṁ labhetha, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If this is what happens, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce labhetha, so vattabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If not, he should be told, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“āvuso, imaṁ chaḍḍehī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Discard it.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace so chaḍḍeti, iccetaṁ kusalaṁ;</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he discards it, all is well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">no ce chaḍḍeti, pañcahaṅgehi samannāgato bhikkhu rūpiyachaḍḍako sammannitabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he does not, a monk who has five qualities should be appointed as the money discarder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo na chandāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na dosāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na mohāgatiṁ gaccheyya, na bhayāgatiṁ gaccheyya, chaḍḍitāchaḍḍitañca jāneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">one who is not swayed by desire, ill will, confusion, or fear, and who knows what has and has not been discarded. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Evañca pana, bhikkhave, sammannitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this is how he should be appointed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamaṁ bhikkhu yācitabbo.</span></p>
<p class="p3">First the monk should be asked </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yācitvā byattena bhikkhunā paṭibalena saṅgho ñāpetabbo—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and then a competent and capable monk should inform the Sangha: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi saṅghassa pattakallaṁ, saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ rūpiyachaḍḍakaṁ sammanneyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it seems appropriate to the Sangha, it should appoint monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Esā ñatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">This is the motion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suṇātu me, bhante, saṅgho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please, Venerables, I ask the Sangha to listen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saṅgho itthannāmaṁ bhikkhuṁ rūpiyachaḍḍakaṁ sammannati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha appoints monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yassāyasmato khamati itthannāmassa bhikkhuno rūpiyachaḍḍakassa sammuti, so tuṇhassa;</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who agrees to appointing monk so-and-so as the money discarder should remain silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa nakkhamati, so bhāseyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Any monk who doesn’t agree should speak up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sammato saṅghena itthannāmo bhikkhu rūpiyachaḍḍako.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha has appointed monk so-and-so as the money discarder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khamati saṅghassa, tasmā tuṇhī,</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Sangha approves and is therefore silent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evametaṁ dhārayāmī’”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I will remember it thus.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sammatena bhikkhunā animittaṁ katvā pātetabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The appointed monk should throw it away without taking note of the location. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace nimittaṁ katvā pāteti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes note of where he throws it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye rūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, and he perceives it as such, and he receives it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye vematiko rūpiyaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, but he is unsure of it, and he receives it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiye arūpiyasaññī rūpiyaṁ paṭiggaṇhāti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is money, but he does not perceive it as such, and he receives it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye rūpiyasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he perceives it as such, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Arūpiye arūpiyasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is not money, and he does not perceive it as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ajjhārāme vā ajjhāvasathe vā uggahetvā vā uggahāpetvā vā nikkhipati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, within a monastery or a house, he takes it or has someone take it, and he then puts it aside with the thought, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yassa bhavissati so harissatīti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Whoever this belongs to will fetch it;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rūpiyasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ aṭṭhamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on money, the eighth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
