<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np29_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">29. Sāsaṅkasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">29. The training rule on what is risky </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū vutthavassā āraññakesu senāsanesu viharanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At that time monks who had completed the rainy-season residence were staying in wilderness dwellings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kattikacorakā bhikkhū—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thieves who were active during the month of Kattika attacked those monks, thinking, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“laddhalābhā”ti paripātenti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“They have been given things.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks told the Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho bhagavā etasmiṁ nidāne etasmiṁ pakaraṇe dhammiṁ kathaṁ katvā bhikkhū āmantesi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards the Buddha gave a teaching and addressed the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“anujānāmi, bhikkhave, āraññakesu senāsanesu viharantena tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitun”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, I allow monks who are staying in wilderness dwellings to store one of their three robes in an inhabited area.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena bhikkhū—“bhagavatā anuññātaṁ āraññakesu senāsanesu viharantena tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitun”ti tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitvā atirekachārattaṁ vippavasanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When they heard about this, monks stored one of their three robes in inhabited areas, staying apart from them for more than six days. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tāni cīvarāni nassantipi vinassantipi ḍayhantipi undūrehipi khajjanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robes were lost, ruined, burnt, and eaten by rats. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū duccoḷā honti lūkhacīvarā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a consequence, those monks became poorly dressed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū evamāhaṁsu—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Other monks asked them why, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tumhe, āvuso, duccoḷā lūkhacīvarā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū bhikkhūnaṁ etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">and they told them what had happened. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhū tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitvā atirekachārattaṁ vippavasissantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can those monks store one of their three robes in an inhabited area and then stay apart from it for more than six days?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū te anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira, bhikkhave, bhikkhū tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitvā atirekachārattaṁ vippavasantī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that there are monks who do this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha criticized them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma te, bhikkhave, moghapurisā tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipitvā atirekachārattaṁ vippavasissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks, how can those foolish men do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, bhikkhave, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Upavassaṁ kho pana kattikapuṇṇamaṁ yāni kho pana tāni āraññakāni senāsanāni sāsaṅkasammatāni sappaṭibhayāni tathārūpesu bhikkhu senāsanesu viharanto ākaṅkhamāno tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaraṁ antaraghare nikkhipeyya, siyā ca tassa bhikkhuno kocideva paccayo tena cīvarena vippavāsāya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘There are wilderness dwellings that are considered risky and dangerous. After observing the Kattika full moon that ends the rainy season, a monk who is staying in such a dwelling may, if he so desires, store one of his three robes in an inhabited area so long as he has a reason for staying apart from that robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chārattaparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā tena cīvarena vippavasitabbaṁ. Tato ce uttari vippavaseyya, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should stay apart from that robe for six days at the most. If he stays apart from it beyond that, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upavassaṁ kho panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">After observing: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">vuṭṭhavassānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">after completing the rainy season. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kattikapuṇṇamanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Kattika full moon that ends the rainy season: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kattikacātumāsinī vuccati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the fourth full moon of the rainy season in the month of Kattika is what is meant. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni kho pana tāni āraññakāni senāsanānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">There are wilderness dwellings: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āraññakaṁ nāma senāsanaṁ</span></p>
<p class="p3">a wilderness dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pañcadhanusatikaṁ pacchimaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">it is at least 800 meters away from any inhabited area. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaṅkaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Risky: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ārāmūpacāre corānaṁ niviṭṭhokāso dissati, bhuttokāso dissati, ṭhitokāso dissati, nisinnokāso dissati, nipannokāso dissati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the monastery, or in the vicinity of the monastery, thieves have been seen camping, eating, standing, seated, or lying down. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sappaṭibhayaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Dangerous: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ārāme ārāmūpacāre corehi manussā hatā dissanti, viluttā dissanti, ākoṭitā dissanti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">in the monastery, or in the vicinity of the monastery, thieves have been seen injuring, robbing, or beating people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathārūpesu bhikkhu senāsanesu viharantoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A monk who is staying in such a dwelling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evarūpesu bhikkhu senāsanesu viharanto.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk who is staying in that kind of dwelling. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamānoti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he so desires: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">icchamāno.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he so wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tiṇṇaṁ cīvarānaṁ aññataraṁ cīvaranti</span></p>
<p class="p3">One of his three robes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saṅghāṭiṁ vā uttarāsaṅgaṁ vā antaravāsakaṁ vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the outer robe, the upper robe, or the sarong. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antaraghare nikkhipeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">May store in an inhabited area: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samantā gocaragāme nikkhipeyya.</span></p>
<p class="p3">may store it anywhere in his alms village. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Siyā ca tassa bhikkhuno kocideva paccayo tena cīvarena vippavāsāyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">So long as he has a reason for staying apart from that robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">siyā paccayo siyā karaṇīyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if there is a reason, if there is something to be done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Chārattaparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā tena cīvarena vippavasitabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should stay apart from that robe for six days at the most: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chārattaparamatā vippavasitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he should stay apart from it for six days at a maximum. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññatra bhikkhusammutiyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Except if the monks have agreed: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhapetvā bhikkhusammutiṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">unless the monks have agreed. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari vippavaseyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stays apart from it beyond that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattame aruṇuggamane nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the robe becomes subject to relinquishment at dawn on the seventh day. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ atirekachārattaṁ vippavutthaṁ, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe, which I have stayed apart from for more than six days without the agreement of the monks, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmīti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekachāratte atirekasaññī vippavasati, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than six days and he perceives it as more, and he is staying apart from it, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekachāratte vematiko vippavasati, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than six days, but he is unsure of it, and he is staying apart from it, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekachāratte ūnakasaññī vippavasati, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is more than six days, but he perceives it as less, and he is staying apart from it, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appaccuddhaṭe paccuddhaṭasaññī …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the determination has not been given up, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avissajjite vissajjitasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe has not been given away, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">anaṭṭhe naṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe has not been lost, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avinaṭṭhe vinaṭṭhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe has not been ruined, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">adaḍḍhe daḍḍhasaññī …</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe has not been burnt, but he perceives that it has … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">avilutte viluttasaññī vippavasati, aññatra bhikkhusammutiyā, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the robe has not been stolen, but he perceives that it has, and he is staying apart from it, then, except if the monks have agreed, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissaggiyaṁ cīvaraṁ anissajjitvā paribhuñjati, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he uses a robe that should be relinquished without first relinquishing it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakachāratte atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than six days, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakachāratte vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than six days, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakachāratte ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If it is less than six days and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chārattaṁ vippavasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays apart from the robe for six days; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakachārattaṁ vippavasati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he stays apart from the robe for less than six days; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">chārattaṁ vippavasitvā puna gāmasīmaṁ okkamitvā vasitvā pakkamati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if, after staying apart from it for six days, he stays overnight within the village boundary and then leaves; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">antochārattaṁ paccuddharati, vissajjeti, nassati, vinassati, ḍayhati, acchinditvā gaṇhanti, vissāsaṁ gaṇhanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if within the six days he gives up the determination, or the robe is given away, lost, ruined, burnt, stolen, or taken on trust; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhusammutiyā,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he has the permission of the monks; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāsaṅkasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ navamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on what is risky, the ninth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
