<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np16_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosiyavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on silk </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">16. Eḷakalomasikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">16. The training rule on wool </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññatarassa bhikkhuno kosalesu janapade sāvatthiṁ gacchantassa antarāmagge eḷakalomāni uppajjiṁsu.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a certain monk was given wool as he was walking through the Kosalan country on his way to Sāvatthī. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu tāni eḷakalomāni uttarāsaṅgena bhaṇḍikaṁ bandhitvā agamāsi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">He bound it into a bundle with his upper robe and carried on. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā taṁ bhikkhuṁ passitvā uppaṇḍesuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People who saw him teased him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kittakena te, bhante, kītāni?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable, how much did it cost you? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kittako udayo bhavissatī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">How much will the profit be?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So bhikkhu tehi manussehi uppaṇḍiyamāno maṅku ahosi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">As a result he was humiliated. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho so bhikkhu sāvatthiṁ gantvā tāni eḷakalomāni ṭhitakova āsumbhi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he arrived at Sāvatthī, he threw the wool to the ground. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhū taṁ bhikkhuṁ etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks asked him why. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kissa tvaṁ, āvuso, imāni eḷakalomāni ṭhitakova āsumbhasī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tathā hi panāhaṁ, āvuso, imesaṁ eḷakalomānaṁ kāraṇā manussehi uppaṇḍito”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“People have been teasing me because of this wool.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Kīva dūrato pana tvaṁ, āvuso, imāni eḷakalomāni āharī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“But how far have you carried it?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atirekatiyojanaṁ, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Over 40 kilometers.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks of few desires complained and criticized him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma bhikkhu atirekatiyojanaṁ eḷakalomāni āharissatī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can a monk carry wool more than 40 kilometers?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū taṁ bhikkhuṁ anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking that monk in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tvaṁ, bhikkhu, atirekatiyojanaṁ eḷakalomāni āharī”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monk, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked him … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tvaṁ, moghapurisa, atirekatiyojanaṁ eḷakalomāni āharissasi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish man, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ moghapurisa, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhikkhuno paneva addhānamaggappaṭipannassa eḷakalomāni uppajjeyyuṁ. Ākaṅkhamānena bhikkhunā paṭiggahetabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If wool is given to a monk who is traveling, he may receive it if he wishes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahetvā tiyojanaparamaṁ sahatthā haritabbāni, asante hārake.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it and there is no one else to carry it, he may carry it himself for at most 40 kilometers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari hareyya, asantepi hārake, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he carries it further than that, even if there is no one else to carry it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhikkhuno paneva addhānamaggappaṭipannassāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">To a monk who is traveling: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">panthaṁ gacchantassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">to one who is walking on a road. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eḷakalomāni uppajjeyyunti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If wool is given: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uppajjeyyuṁ saṅghato vā gaṇato vā ñātito vā mittato vā paṁsukūlaṁ vā attano vā dhanena.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is given by a Sangha, by a group, by a relative, by a friend, or if it is discarded wool, or if he got it by means of his own property. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ākaṅkhamānenāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he wishes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">icchamānena paṭiggahetabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he desires, he may receive it. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭiggahetvā tiyojanaparamaṁ sahatthā haritabbānīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he receives it, he may carry it himself for at most 40 kilometers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiyojanaparamatā sahatthā haritabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he may carry it himself a maximum of 40 kilometers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asante hāraketi</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no one else to carry it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nāñño koci hārako hoti itthī vā puriso vā gahaṭṭho vā pabbajito vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">there is no other person who can carry it, either a woman or a man, either a lay person or a monastic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari hareyya, asantepi hāraketi</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he carries it further than that, even if there is no one else to carry it: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">paṭhamaṁ pādaṁ tiyojanaṁ atikkāmeti, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">when he goes beyond 40 kilometers with the first foot, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyaṁ pādaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he goes beyond with the second foot, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Antotiyojane ṭhito bahitiyojanaṁ pāteti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stands within the 40 kilometer limit, but drops it beyond the 40 kilometer limit, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññassa yāne vā bhaṇḍe vā ajānantassa pakkhipitvā tiyojanaṁ atikkāmeti, nissaggiyāni honti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he places it in the vehicle or among the goods of another without their knowledge, and it goes more than 40 kilometers, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbāni saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The wool should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“imāni me, bhante, eḷakalomāni tiyojanaṁ atikkāmitāni nissaggiyāni.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this wool, which I have taken more than 40 kilometers, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imānāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this wool back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiyojane atirekasaññī atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it more than 40 kilometers and he perceives it as more, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiyojane vematiko atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it more than 40 kilometers, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirekatiyojane ūnakasaññī atikkāmeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it more than 40 kilometers, but he perceives it as less, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiyojane atirekasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it less than 40 kilometers, but he perceives it as more, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiyojane vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it less than 40 kilometers, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ūnakatiyojane ūnakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he takes it less than 40 kilometers and he perceives it as less, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiyojanaṁ harati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he carries it 40 kilometers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ūnakatiyojanaṁ harati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he carries it less than 40 kilometers; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiyojanaṁ haratipi paccāharatipi,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he carries it 40 kilometers and then carries it back; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tiyojanaṁ vāsādhippāyo gantvā tato paraṁ harati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes it 40 kilometers with the intention of staying there, but then takes it further; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnaṁ paṭilabhitvā harati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets back what had been taken from him and then carries it on; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nissaṭṭhaṁ paṭilabhitvā harati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets back what he had given up and then carries it on; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññaṁ harāpeti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he gets someone else to carry it; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">katabhaṇḍaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is a finished article; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eḷakalomasikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on wool, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
