<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np7_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cīvaravagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on robes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7. Tatuttarisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">7. The training rule on more than that </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā sāvatthiyaṁ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in Anāthapiṇḍika’s Monastery, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū acchinnacīvarake bhikkhū upasaṅkamitvā evaṁ vadanti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six said to the monks whose robes had been stolen, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhagavatā, āvuso, anuññātaṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“The Buddha has allowed </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘acchinnacīvarassa vā naṭṭhacīvarassa vā aññātakaṁ gahapatiṁ vā gahapatāniṁ vā cīvaraṁ viññāpetuṁ’;</span></p>
<p class="p3">a monk whose robes have been stolen or ruined to ask an unrelated householder for a robe. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">viññāpetha, āvuso, cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">You should ask for a robe.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Alaṁ, āvuso, laddhaṁ amhehi cīvaran”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s not necessary. We’ve already got one.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Mayaṁ āyasmantānaṁ viññāpemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“We’ll ask for you.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Viññāpetha, āvuso”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Do as you please.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū gahapatike upasaṅkamitvā etadavocuṁ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks from the group of six then went to householders and said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchinnacīvarakā, āvuso, bhikkhū āgatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Monks have arrived whose robes have been stolen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Detha nesaṁ cīvarānī”ti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">Please give them robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahuṁ cīvaraṁ viññāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And they asked for many robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena aññataro puriso sabhāyaṁ nisinno aññataraṁ purisaṁ etadavoca—</span></p>
<p class="p3">Soon afterwards in the public meeting hall a certain man said to another, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“acchinnacīvarakā ayyo bhikkhū āgatā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Sir, monks have arrived whose robes have been stolen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tesaṁ mayā cīvaraṁ dinnan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">I’ve given them robes.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sopi evamāha—“mayāpi dinnan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The other replied, “So have I.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparopi evamāha—“mayāpi dinnan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">And another said the same. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ cīvaraṁ viññāpessanti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics ask for many robes without moderation? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dussavāṇijjaṁ vā samaṇā sakyaputtiyā karissanti, paggāhikasālaṁ vā pasāressantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Will they start up as cloth merchants or set up shop?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ cīvaraṁ viññāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How could the monks from the group of six ask for many robes without moderation?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned the monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ cīvaraṁ viññāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, na mattaṁ jānitvā bahuṁ cīvaraṁ viññāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how could you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” …  </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tañce aññātako gahapati vā gahapatānī vā bahūhi cīvarehi abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreyya santaruttaraparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā tato cīvaraṁ sāditabbaṁ. Tato ce uttari sādiyeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If an unrelated male or female householder invites that monk to take many robes, he should accept at most one sarong and one upper robe. If he accepts more than that, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tañceti</span></p>
<p class="p3">That monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">acchinnacīvarakaṁ bhikkhuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monk whose robes have been stolen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātako nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Unrelated: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mātito vā pitito vā yāva sattamā pitāmahayugā asambaddho.</span></p>
<p class="p3">anyone who is not a descendant of one’s male ancestors going back seven generations, either on the mother’s side or on the father’s side. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapati nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A male householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo koci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any man who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gahapatānī nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">A female householder: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yā kāci agāraṁ ajjhāvasati.</span></p>
<p class="p3">any woman who lives at home. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahūhi cīvarehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Many robes: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahukehi cīvarehi.</span></p>
<p class="p3">a lot of robes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhihaṭṭhuṁ pavāreyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Invites to take: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yāvatakaṁ icchasi tāvatakaṁ gaṇhāhīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">saying, “Take as many as you like.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Santaruttaraparamaṁ tena bhikkhunā tato cīvaraṁ sāditabbanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">He should accept at most one sarong and one upper robe: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace tīṇi naṭṭhāni honti dve sāditabbāni, dve naṭṭhāni ekaṁ sāditabbaṁ, ekaṁ naṭṭhaṁ na kiñci sāditabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if three robes are ruined, he should accept two; if two robes are ruined, he should accept one; if one robe is ruined, he should not accept any. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato ce uttari sādiyeyyāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he accepts more than that: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">tatuttari viññāpeti, payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he asks for more than that, then for the effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the robe, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ aññātakaṁ gahapatikaṁ upasaṅkamitvā tatuttari viññāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe, which I received after asking an unrelated householder for too many, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake aññātakasaññī tatuttari cīvaraṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is unrelated and the monk perceives them as such, and he asks them for too many robes, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake vematiko tatuttari cīvaraṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is unrelated, but the monk is unsure of it, and he asks them for too many robes, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātake ñātakasaññī tatuttari cīvaraṁ viññāpeti, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is unrelated, but the monk perceives them as related, and he asks them for too many robes, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake aññātakasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is related, but the monk perceives them as unrelated, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is related, but the monk is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātake ñātakasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If the person is related and the monk perceives them as such, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sesakaṁ āharissāmī”ti haranto gacchati,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he takes too much, but with the intention of returning the remainder; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“sesakaṁ tuyheva hotū”ti denti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they give, saying, “The remainder is for you;” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na acchinnakāraṇā denti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they give, but not because his robes were stolen; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na naṭṭhakāraṇā denti,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if they give, but not because his robes were ruined; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of his own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatuttarisikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ sattamaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on more than that, the seventh, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
