<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">pli-tv-bu-vb-np26_root-pli-ms.j. Nissaggiyakaṇḍa - The chapter on relinquishment </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t4"/></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pattavagga</span></p>
<p class="p3">The sub-chapter on almsbowls </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26. Suttaviññattisikkhāpada</span></p>
<p class="p3">26. The training rule on asking for thread </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena samayena buddho bhagavā rājagahe viharati veḷuvane kalandakanivāpe.</span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time when the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena kho pana samayena chabbaggiyā bhikkhū cīvarakārasamaye bahuṁ suttaṁ viññāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">the monks from the group of six were making robes and they asked for a large amount of thread. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katepi cīvare bahuṁ suttaṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">But when their robes were finished, there was much thread left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyānaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ etadahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">They said, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“handa mayaṁ, āvuso, aññampi suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpemā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Well, let’s ask for even more thread and get weavers to weave us robe-cloth.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū aññampi suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītepi cīvare bahuṁ suttaṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Yet even when that robe-cloth had been woven, there was much thread left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dutiyampi kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū aññampi suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A second time they asked for more thread and had weavers weave them robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vītepi cīvare bahuṁ suttaṁ avasiṭṭhaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">Once again there was much thread left over. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatiyampi kho chabbaggiyā bhikkhū aññampi suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpesuṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">A third time they asked for more thread and had weavers weave them robe-cloth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussā ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">People complained and criticized them, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma samaṇā sakyaputtiyā sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the Sakyan monastics ask for thread and then get weavers to weave them robe-cloth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Assosuṁ kho bhikkhū tesaṁ manussānaṁ ujjhāyantānaṁ khiyyantānaṁ vipācentānaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The monks heard the complaints of those people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ye te bhikkhū appicchā …pe… te ujjhāyanti khiyyanti vipācenti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">and the monks of few desires complained and criticized those monks, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“kathañhi nāma chabbaggiyā bhikkhū sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpessantī”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“How can the monks from the group of six ask for thread and then get weavers to weave them robe-cloth?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha kho te bhikkhū chabbaggiye bhikkhū anekapariyāyena vigarahitvā bhagavato etamatthaṁ ārocesuṁ …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">After rebuking those monks in many ways, they told the Buddha. Soon afterwards he had the Sangha gathered and questioned those monks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“saccaṁ kira tumhe, bhikkhave, sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpethā”ti?</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Is it true, monks, that you did this?” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccaṁ, bhagavā”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“It’s true, Sir.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigarahi buddho bhagavā …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha rebuked them … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kathañhi nāma tumhe, moghapurisā, sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpessatha.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“Foolish men, how can you do this? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Netaṁ, moghapurisā, appasannānaṁ vā pasādāya …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">This will affect people’s confidence …” … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">evañca pana, bhikkhave, imaṁ sikkhāpadaṁ uddiseyyātha—</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, this training rule should be recited like this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yo pana bhikkhu sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi cīvaraṁ vāyāpeyya, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyan”ti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘If a monk himself asks for thread, and then has weavers weave him robe-cloth, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yo panāti</span></p>
<p class="p3">A: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">yo yādiso …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">whoever … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bhikkhūti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Monk: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe… ayaṁ imasmiṁ atthe adhippeto bhikkhūti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">… The monk who has been given the full ordination by a unanimous Sangha through a legal procedure consisting of one motion and three announcements that is irreversible and fit to stand—this sort of monk is meant in this case. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sāmanti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Himself: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sayaṁ viññāpetvā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">he himself has asked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttaṁ nāma</span></p>
<p class="p3">Thread: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cha suttāni—</span></p>
<p class="p3">there are six kinds of thread: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">khomaṁ kappāsikaṁ koseyyaṁ kambalaṁ sāṇaṁ bhaṅgaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">linen, cotton, silk, wool, sunn hemp, and hemp. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tantavāyehīti</span></p>
<p class="p3">Weavers: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pesakārehi vāyāpeti, payoge payoge dukkaṭaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he has it woven by weavers, then for every effort there is an act of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilābhena nissaggiyaṁ hoti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he gets the robe-cloth, it becomes subject to relinquishment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nissajjitabbaṁ saṅghassa vā gaṇassa vā puggalassa vā.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The robe-cloth should be relinquished to a sangha, a group, or an individual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evañca pana, bhikkhave, nissajjitabbaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">“And, monks, it should be relinquished like this. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">…pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">(To be expanded as in [Relinquishment 1](pli-tv-bu-vb-np1:3.2.5--3.2.29), with appropriate substitutions.) </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“idaṁ me, bhante, cīvaraṁ sāmaṁ suttaṁ viññāpetvā tantavāyehi vāyāpitaṁ nissaggiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Venerables, this robe-cloth, which I got weavers to weave after asking for the thread myself, is to be relinquished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāhaṁ saṅghassa nissajjāmī”ti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">I relinquish it to the Sangha.’ … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyāti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">the Sangha should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dadeyyunti …pe…</span></p>
<p class="p3">you should give … </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyasmato dammīti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">‘I give this robe-cloth back to you.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāyāpite vāyāpitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he had it woven, and he perceives that he did, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāyāpite vematiko, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he had it woven, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāyāpite avāyāpitasaññī, nissaggiyaṁ pācittiyaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he had it woven, but he does not perceive that he did, he commits an offense entailing relinquishment and confession. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avāyāpite vāyāpitasaññī, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he did not have it woven, but he perceives that he did, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avāyāpite vematiko, āpatti dukkaṭassa.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he did not have it woven, but he is unsure of it, he commits an offense of wrong conduct. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avāyāpite avāyāpitasaññī, anāpatti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">If he did not have it woven, and he does not perceive that he did, there is no offense. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anāpatti—</span></p>
<p class="p3">There is no offense: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cīvaraṁ sibbetuṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is to sew a robe; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">āyoge,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a back-and-knee strap; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kāyabandhane,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a belt; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aṁsabaddhake,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a shoulder strap; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pattatthavikāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a bowl bag; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">parissāvane,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is for a water filter; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ñātakānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from relatives; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pavāritānaṁ,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is from those who have given an invitation; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aññassatthāya,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it for the benefit of someone else; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">attano dhanena,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if it is by means of one’s own property; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ummattakassa,</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is insane; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ādikammikassāti.</span></p>
<p class="p3">if he is the first offender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suttaviññattisikkhāpadaṁ niṭṭhitaṁ chaṭṭhaṁ.</span></p>
<p class="p3">The training rule on asking for thread, the sixth, is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
