<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>30-Lakkhaṇasutta  - The Marks of a Great Man </title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><h3 class="h31"><span class="th31">30. Lakkhaṇasutta  - The Marks of a Great Man </span></h3>
<p class="p3"><span class="t3">Dīgha Nikāya 30  - Long Discourses 30 </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Evaṃ me sutaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">So I have heard. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. </span></p>
<p class="p3">At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatra kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“bhikkhavo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants!” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Bhaddante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Venerable sir,” they replied. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhagavā etadavoca: </span></p>
<p class="p3">The Buddha said this: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dvattiṃsimāni, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yehi samannāgatassa mahāpurisassa dveva gatiyo bhavanti anaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">“There are thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni satta ratanāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the following seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—cakkaratanaṃ hatthiratanaṃ assaratanaṃ maṇiratanaṃ itthiratanaṃ gahapatiratanaṃ pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Katamāni ca tāni, bhikkhave, dvattiṃsa mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yehi samannāgatassa mahāpurisassa dveva gatiyo bhavanti anaññā? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what are the thirty-two marks? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha, bhikkhave, mahāpuriso suppatiṭṭhitapādo hoti. Yampi, bhikkhave, mahāpuriso suppatiṭṭhitapādo hoti, idampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has well-planted feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa heṭṭhāpādatalesu cakkāni jātāni honti sahassārāni sanemikāni sanābhikāni sabbākāraparipūrāni. Yampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa heṭṭhāpādatalesu cakkāni jātāni honti sahassārāni sanemikāni sanābhikāni sabbākāraparipūrāni, idampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and hubs, complete in every detail. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mahāpuriso āyatapaṇhi hoti … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has projecting heels. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dīghaṅguli hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has long fingers. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mudutalunahatthapādo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hands and feet are tender. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">jālahatthapādo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hands and feet cling gracefully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ussaṅkhapādo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His feet are arched. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">eṇijaṅgho hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His calves are like those of an antelope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ṭhitakova anonamanto ubhohi pāṇitalehi jaṇṇukāni parimasati parimajjati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohitavatthaguyho hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His private parts are retracted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">suvaṇṇavaṇṇo hoti kañcanasannibhattaco … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is gold colored; his skin has a golden sheen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sukhumacchavi hoti, sukhumattā chaviyā rajojallaṃ kāye na upalimpati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don’t stick to his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ekekalomo hoti, ekekāni lomāni lomakūpesu jātāni … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hairs grow one per pore. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uddhaggalomo hoti, uddhaggāni lomāni jātāni nīlāni añjanavaṇṇāni kuṇḍalāvaṭṭāni dakkhiṇāvaṭṭakajātāni … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hairs stand up; they’re blue-black and curl clockwise. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmujugatto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His body is as straight as Brahmā’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattussado hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has bulging muscles in seven places. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhapubbaddhakāyo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His chest is like that of a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">citantaraṃso hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gap between the shoulder-blades is filled in. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">nigrodhaparimaṇḍalo hoti, yāvatakvassa kāyo tāvatakvassa byāmo yāvatakvassa byāmo tāvatakvassa kāyo … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his arms equals the height of his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samavaṭṭakkhandho hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His torso is cylindrical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rasaggasaggī hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has an excellent sense of taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhahanu hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His jaw is like that of a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cattālīsadanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has forty teeth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samadanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth are even. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">aviraḷadanto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth have no gaps. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">susukkadāṭho hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His teeth are perfectly white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pahūtajivho hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large tongue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">brahmassaro hoti karavīkabhāṇī … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the voice of Brahmā, like a cuckoo’s call. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">abhinīlanetto hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">His eyes are deep blue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">gopakhumo hoti … </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has eyelashes like a cow’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uṇṇā bhamukantare jātā hoti, odātā mudutūlasannibhā. Yampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa uṇṇā bhamukantare jātā hoti, odātā mudutūlasannibhā, idampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like cotton-wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puna caparaṃ, bhikkhave, mahāpuriso uṇhīsasīso hoti. Yampi, bhikkhave, mahāpuriso uṇhīsasīso hoti, idampi, bhikkhave, mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His head is shaped like a turban. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho tāni, bhikkhave, dvattiṃsa mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni, yehi samannāgatassa mahāpurisassa dveva gatiyo bhavanti anaññā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">These are the thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3"> </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imāni kho, bhikkhave, dvattiṃsa mahāpurisassa mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni bāhirakāpi isayo dhārenti, no ca kho te jānanti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">Seers outside of Buddhism remember these marks, but they do not know </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘imassa kammassa kaṭattā idaṃ lakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhatī’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the specific deeds performed in the past to obtain each mark. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">1. Suppatiṭṭhitapādatālakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">1. Well-Planted Feet </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno daḷhasamādāno ahosi kusalesu dhammesu, avatthitasamādāno kāyasucarite vacīsucarite manosucarite dānasaṃvibhāge sīlasamādāne uposathupavāse matteyyatāya petteyyatāya sāmaññatāya brahmaññatāya kule jeṭṭhāpacāyitāya aññataraññataresu ca adhikusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In some past lives, past existences, past abodes the Realized One was reborn as a human being. He firmly undertook and persisted in skillful behaviors such as good conduct by way of body, speech, giving and sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect to mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the family, and various other things pertaining to skillful behaviors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā ussannattā vipulattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing, accumulating, heaping up, and amassing those deeds, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha aññe deve dasahi ṭhānehi adhiggaṇhāti dibbena āyunā dibbena vaṇṇena dibbena sukhena dibbena yasena dibbena ādhipateyyena dibbehi rūpehi dibbehi saddehi dibbehi gandhehi dibbehi rasehi dibbehi phoṭṭhabbehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he surpassed the other gods in ten respects: divine life span, beauty, happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he passed away from there and came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark of a great man: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suppatiṭṭhitapādo hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has well-planted feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṃ pādaṃ bhūmiyaṃ nikkhipati, samaṃ uddharati, samaṃ sabbāvantehi pādatalehi bhūmiṃ phusati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He places his foot on the ground evenly, raises it evenly, and touches the ground evenly with the whole sole of his foot. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni satta ratanāni bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the following seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Seyyathidaṃ—cakkaratanaṃ hatthiratanaṃ assaratanaṃ maṇiratanaṃ itthiratanaṃ gahapatiratanaṃ pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ akhilamanimittamakaṇṭakaṃ iddhaṃ phītaṃ khemaṃ sivaṃ nirabbudaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea—free of harassment by bandits, successful and prosperous, safe, blessed, and untroubled—he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhambhiyo hoti kenaci manussabhūtena paccatthikena paccāmittena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He can’t be stopped by any human foe or enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhambhiyo hoti abbhantarehi vā bāhirehi vā paccatthikehi paccāmittehi rāgena vā dosena vā mohena vā samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He can’t be stopped by any foe or enemy whether internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sacce ca dhamme ca dame ca saṃyame, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Truth, principle, self-control, and restraint; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Soceyyasīlālayuposathesu ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">purity, precepts, and observing the sabbath; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dāne ahiṃsāya asāhase rato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">giving, harmlessness, delighting in non-violence—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Daḷhaṃ samādāya samattamācari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">firmly undertaking these things, he lived accordingly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena kammena divaṃ samakkami, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By means of these deeds he went to heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhañca khiḍḍāratiyo ca anvabhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed happiness and merriment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato cavitvā punarāgato idha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After passing away from there to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samehi pādehi phusī vasundharaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he steps evenly on this rich earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu veyyañjanikā samāgatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gathered soothsayers predicted </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samappatiṭṭhassa na hoti khambhanā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that there is no stopping one of such even tread, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihissa vā pabbajitassa vā puna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as householder or renunciate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ lakkhaṇaṃ bhavati tadatthajotakaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the meaning shown by this mark. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhambhiyo hoti agāramāvasaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">While living at home he cannot be stopped, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parābhibhū sattubhi nappamaddano; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he defeats his foes, and cannot be beaten. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussabhūtenidha hoti kenaci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to the fruit of that deed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akkhambhiyo tassa phalena kammuno. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he cannot be stopped by any human. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ca pabbajjamupeti tādiso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he chooses the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammachandābhirato vicakkhaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing clearly, loving renunciation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggo na so gacchati jātu khambhanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">not even the best can hope to stop him; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Naruttamo esa hi tassa dhammatā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">this is the nature of the supreme person.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">2. Pādatalacakkalakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">2. Wheels on the Feet </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahujanassa sukhāvaho ahosi, ubbegauttāsabhayaṃ apanuditā, dhammikañca rakkhāvaraṇaguttiṃ saṃvidhātā, saparivārañca dānaṃ adāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He brought happiness to many people, eliminating threats, terror, and danger, providing just protection and security, and giving gifts with all the trimmings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā ussannattā vipulattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Heṭṭhāpādatalesu cakkāni jātāni honti sahassārāni sanemikāni sanābhikāni sabbākāraparipūrāni suvibhattantarāni. </span></p>
<p class="p3">on the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and hubs, complete in every detail and well divided inside. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāparivāro hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large following </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāssa honti parivārā brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a fully awakened Buddha. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāparivāro hoti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large following </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahāssa honti parivārā bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pure puratthā purimāsu jātisu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In olden days, in past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussabhūto bahunaṃ sukhāvaho; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he brought happiness to many people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhegauttāsabhayāpanūdano, </span></p>
<p class="p3">ridding them of fear, terror, and danger, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Guttīsu rakkhāvaraṇesu ussuko. </span></p>
<p class="p3">zealously guarding and protecting them. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena kammena divaṃ samakkami, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By means of these deeds he went to heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhañca khiḍḍāratiyo ca anvabhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed happiness and merriment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato cavitvā punarāgato idha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After passing away from there to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cakkāni pādesu duvesu vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">wheels on his two feet are found, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samantanemīni sahassarāni ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">all rimmed around and thousand-spoked. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu veyyañjanikā samāgatā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">The gathered soothsayers predicted, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Disvā kumāraṃ satapuññalakkhaṇaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing the prince with the hundred-fold mark of merits, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parivāravā hessati sattumaddano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that he’d have a following, subduing foes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathā hi cakkāni samantanemini, </span></p>
<p class="p3">which is why he has wheels all rimmed around. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace na pabbajjamupeti tādiso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t choose the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vatteti cakkaṃ pathaviṃ pasāsati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll roll the wheel and rule the land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassānuyantādha bhavanti khattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The aristocrats will be his vassals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāyasaṃ samparivārayanti naṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">flocking to his glory. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ca pabbajjamupeti tādiso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he chooses the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammachandābhirato vicakkhaṇo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing clearly, loving renunciation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Devā manussāsurasakkarakkhasā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the gods, humans, demons, Sakka, and monsters; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhabbanāgā vihagā catuppadā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fairies and dragons, birds and beasts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anuttaraṃ devamanussapūjitaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">will flock to his glory, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāyasaṃ samparivārayanti nan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme, honored by gods and humans.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">3–5. Āyatapaṇhitāditilakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">3–5. Projecting Heels, Etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pāṇātipātaṃ pahāya pāṇātipātā paṭivirato ahosi nihitadaṇḍo nihitasattho lajjī dayāpanno, sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī vihāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gave up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. He was scrupulous and kind, living full of compassion for all living beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā ussannattā vipulattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni tīṇi mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these three marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āyatapaṇhi ca hoti, dīghaṅguli ca brahmujugatto ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has projecting heels, long fingers, and his body is as straight as Brahmā’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghāyuko hoti ciraṭṭhitiko, dīghamāyuṃ pāleti, na sakkā hoti antarā jīvitā voropetuṃ kenaci manussabhūtena paccatthikena paccāmittena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s long lived, preserving his life for a long time. No human foe or enemy is able to take his life before his time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghāyuko hoti ciraṭṭhitiko, dīghamāyuṃ pāleti, na sakkā hoti antarā jīvitā voropetuṃ paccatthikehi paccāmittehi samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s long lived, preserving his life for a long time. No foes or enemies—nor any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world—is able to take his life before his time. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Māraṇavadhabhayattano viditvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Realizing for himself the horrors of death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭivirato paraṃ māraṇāyahosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he refrained from killing other creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena sucaritena saggamagamā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By that good conduct he went to heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukataphalavipākamanubhosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caviya punaridhāgato samāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Passing away, on his return to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilabhati idha tīṇi lakkhaṇāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he obtained these three marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavati vipuladīghapāsaṇhiko, </span></p>
<p class="p3">his projecting heels are full and long, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmāva suju subho sujātagatto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he’s straight, beautiful, and well-formed, like Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Subhujo susu susaṇṭhito sujāto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Fair of limb, youthful, of good posture and breeding, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mudutalunaṅguliyassa honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">his fingers are soft and tender and long. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dīghā tībhi purisavaraggalakkhaṇehi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By these three marks of an excellent man, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirayapanāya kumāramādisanti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they indicated that the prince’s life would be long: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavati yadi gihī ciraṃ yapeti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘As a householder he will live long; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirataraṃ pabbajati yadi tato hi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">longer still if he goes forth, due to </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāpayati ca vasiddhibhāvanāya, </span></p>
<p class="p3">mastery in the development of psychic power. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Iti dīghāyukatāya taṃ nimittan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Thus this is the sign of long life.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">6. Sattussadatālakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">6. Seven Bulges </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dātā ahosi paṇītānaṃ rasitānaṃ khādanīyānaṃ bhojanīyānaṃ sāyanīyānaṃ lehanīyānaṃ pānānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was a donor of fine and tasty foods and drinks of all kinds, delicious and scrumptious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati, sattussado hoti, sattassa ussadā honti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: he has bulging muscles in seven places. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">ubhosu hatthesu ussadā honti, ubhosu pādesu ussadā honti, ubhosu aṃsakūṭesu ussadā honti, khandhe ussado hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has bulges on both hands, both feet, both shoulders, and his chest. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī hoti paṇītānaṃ rasitānaṃ khādanīyānaṃ bhojanīyānaṃ sāyanīyānaṃ lehanīyānaṃ pānānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets fine and tasty foods and drinks of all kinds, delicious and scrumptious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī hoti paṇītānaṃ rasitānaṃ khādanīyānaṃ bhojanīyānaṃ sāyanīyānaṃ lehanīyānaṃ pānānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gets fine and tasty foods and drinks of all kinds, delicious and scrumptious. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Khajjabhojjamatha leyya sāyiyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He used to give the very best of flavors—</p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttamaggarasadāyako ahu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">scrumptious foods of every kind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena so sucaritena kammunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of that good deed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nandane ciramabhippamodati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he rejoiced long in Nandana heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satta cussade idhādhigacchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">On returning to here, he got seven bulging muscles </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hatthapādamudutañca vindati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and tender hands and feet are found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhu byañjananimittakovidā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The soothsayers expert in signs declared: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khajjabhojjarasalābhitāya naṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’ll get tasty foods of all sorts </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yaṃ gihissapi tadatthajotakaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a householder, that’s what that means. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pabbajjampi ca tadādhigacchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But even if he goes forth he’ll get the same, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Khajjabhojjarasalābhiruttamaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">supreme in gaining tasty foods of all sorts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Āhu sabbagihibandhanacchidan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">cutting all bonds of the lay life.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">7–8. Karacaraṇamudujālatālakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">7–8. Tender and Clinging Hands </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">catūhi saṅgahavatthūhi janaṃ saṅgāhako ahosi—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He brought people together using the four ways of being inclusive: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">dānena peyyavajjena atthacariyāya samānattatāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mudutalunahatthapādo ca hoti jālahatthapādo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his hands and feet are tender, and they cling gracefully. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susaṅgahitaparijano hoti, susaṅgahitāssa honti brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue is inclusive, cohesive, and well-managed. This includes brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Susaṅgahitaparijano hoti, susaṅgahitāssa honti bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue is inclusive, cohesive, and well-managed. This includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Dānampi catthacariyatañca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“By giving and helping others, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyavāditañca samānattatañca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">kindly speech, and equal treatment, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kariyacariyasusaṅgahaṃ bahūnaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">such action and conduct as brought people together, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anavamatena guṇena yāti saggaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he went to heaven due to his esteemed virtue. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caviya punaridhāgato samāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Passing away, on his return to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karacaraṇamudutañca jālino ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">the young baby prince obtained </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atirucirasuvaggudassaneyyaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">hands and feet so tender and clinging, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilabhati daharo susu kumāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">lovely, graceful, and good-looking. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavati parijanassavo vidheyyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue is loyal and manageable, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahimaṃ āvasito susaṅgahito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">staying agreeably all over this broad land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyavadū hitasukhataṃ jigīsamāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Speaking kindly, desiring happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhirucitāni guṇāni ācarati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he practices the good qualities he’s adopted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi ca jahati sabbakāmabhogaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathayati dhammakathaṃ jino janassa; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as victor he speaks Dhamma to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vacanapaṭikarassābhippasannā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Devoted, they respond to his words; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sutvāna dhammānudhammamācarantī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">after listening, they practice in line with the teaching.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">9–10. Ussaṅkhapāda-uddhaggalomatālakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">9–10. Arched Feet and Upright Hair </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">atthūpasaṃhitaṃ dhammūpasaṃhitaṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā ahosi, bahujanaṃ nidaṃsesi, pāṇīnaṃ hitasukhāvaho dhammayāgī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His speech was meaningful and principled. He educated many people, bringing welfare and happiness, offering the teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ussaṅkhapādo ca hoti, uddhaggalomo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his feet are arched and his hairs stand up. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato, sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggo ca hoti seṭṭho ca pāmokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro ca kāmabhogīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of those who enjoy sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggo ca hoti seṭṭho ca pāmokkho ca uttamo ca pavaro ca sabbasattānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of all sentient beings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Atthadhammasahitaṃ pure giraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“His word was meaningful and principled, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Erayaṃ bahujanaṃ nidaṃsayi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">moving the people with his explanations. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pāṇinaṃ hitasukhāvaho ahu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He brought welfare and happiness to creatures, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammayāgamayajī amaccharī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">unstintingly offering up teaching. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena so sucaritena kammunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Because of that good deed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suggatiṃ vajati tattha modati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he went to heaven, and there rejoiced. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lakkhaṇāni ca duve idhāgato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">On return to here two marks are found, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uttamappamukhatāya vindati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">of excellence and supremacy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbhamuppatitalomavā saso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His hairs stand upright, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pādagaṇṭhirahu sādhusaṇṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and his ankles stand out well. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Maṃsalohitācitā tacotthatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Swollen with flesh and blood, and wrapped in skin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uparicaraṇasobhanā ahu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they make it pretty above the feet. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gehamāvasati ce tathāvidho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If such a one lives in the home, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggataṃ vajati kāmabhoginaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he becomes best of those who enjoy sensual pleasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena uttaritaro na vijjati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’ll be none better than him; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jambudīpamabhibhuyya iriyati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll live having mastered all India. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pabbajampi ca anomanikkamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But going forth the peerless renunciate </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aggataṃ vajati sabbapāṇinaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">becomes best of all creatures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tena uttaritaro na vijjati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">There’ll be none better than him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sabbalokamabhibhuyya viharatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll live having mastered the whole world.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">11. Eṇijaṅghalakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">11. Antelope Calves </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sakkaccaṃ vācetā ahosi sippaṃ vā vijjaṃ vā caraṇaṃ vā kammaṃ vā: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was a thorough teacher of a profession, a branch of knowledge, conduct, or action, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintime khippaṃ vijāneyyuṃ, khippaṃ paṭipajjeyyuṃ, na ciraṃ kilisseyyun’”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How might they quickly learn and practice, without getting exhausted?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eṇijaṅgho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his calves are like those of an antelope. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni tāni rājārahāni rājaṅgāni rājūpabhogāni rājānucchavikāni tāni khippaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He quickly obtains the things worthy of a king, the factors, supports, and things befitting a king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yāni tāni samaṇārahāni samaṇaṅgāni samaṇūpabhogāni samaṇānucchavikāni, tāni khippaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He quickly obtains the things worthy of an ascetic, the factors, supports, and things befitting an ascetic. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Sippesu vijjācaraṇesu kammesu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In professions, knowledge, conduct, and deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ vijāneyyuṃ lahunti icchati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he thought of how they might swiftly learn. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadūpaghātāya na hoti kassaci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Things that harm no-one at all, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vāceti khippaṃ na ciraṃ kilissati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he quickly taught so they would not get tired. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ kammaṃ katvā kusalaṃ sukhudrayaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having done that skillful deed whose outcome is happiness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jaṅghā manuññā labhate susaṇṭhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he gains prominent and elegant calves. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṭṭā sujātā anupubbamuggatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Well-formed in graceful spirals, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uddhaggalomā sukhumattacotthatā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’s covered in fine rising hairs. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Eṇeyyajaṅghoti tamāhu puggalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They say that person has antelope calves, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sampattiyā khippamidhāhu lakkhaṇaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and that this is the mark of swift success. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gehānulomāni yadābhikaṅkhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he desires the things of the household life, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Apabbajaṃ khippamidhādhigacchati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">not going forth, they’ll quickly be his. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ca pabbajjamupeti tādiso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he chooses the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammachandābhirato vicakkhaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing clearly, loving renunciation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anucchavikassa yadānulomikaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">the peerless renunciate will quickly find </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ vindati khippamanomavikkamo”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what is fitting and suitable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">12. Sukhumacchavilakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">12. Delicate Skin </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samaṇaṃ vā brāhmaṇaṃ vā upasaṅkamitvā paripucchitā ahosi: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He approached an ascetic or brahmin and asked: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kiṃ, bhante, kusalaṃ, kiṃ akusalaṃ, kiṃ sāvajjaṃ, kiṃ anavajjaṃ, kiṃ sevitabbaṃ, kiṃ na sevitabbaṃ, kiṃ me karīyamānaṃ dīgharattaṃ ahitāya dukkhāya assa, kiṃ vā pana me karīyamānaṃ dīgharattaṃ hitāya sukhāya assā’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘Sirs, what is skillful? What is unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless? What should be cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what leads to my lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting welfare and happiness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumacchavi hoti, sukhumattā chaviyā rajojallaṃ kāye na upalimpati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don’t stick to his body. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāpañño hoti, nāssa hoti koci paññāya sadiso vā seṭṭho vā kāmabhogīnaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has great wisdom. Of those who enjoy sensual pleasures, none is his equal or better in wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāpañño hoti puthupañño hāsapañño javanapañño tikkhapañño nibbedhikapañño, nāssa hoti koci paññāya sadiso vā seṭṭho vā sabbasattānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has great wisdom, widespread wisdom, laughing wisdom, swift wisdom, sharp wisdom, and penetrating wisdom. No sentient being is his equal or better in wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pure puratthā purimāsu jātisu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In olden days, in past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aññātukāmo paripucchitā ahu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">eager to understand, he asked questions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sussūsitā pabbajitaṃ upāsitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Keen to learn, he waited on renunciates, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthantaro atthakathaṃ nisāmayi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">heeding their explanation with pure intent. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāpaṭilābhagatena kammunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to that deed of acquiring wisdom, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manussabhūto sukhumacchavī ahu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">as a human being his skin is delicate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu uppādanimittakovidā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">At his birth the soothsayers expert in signs prophesied: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumāni atthāni avecca dakkhiti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He’ll discern delicate matters.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace na pabbajjamupeti tādiso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he doesn’t choose the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vatteti cakkaṃ pathaviṃ pasāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll roll the wheel and rule the land. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthānusiṭṭhīsu pariggahesu ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Among those with material possessions who have been educated, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na tena seyyo sadiso ca vijjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">none equal or better than him is found. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace ca pabbajjamupeti tādiso, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he chooses the life gone forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nekkhammachandābhirato vicakkhaṇo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">seeing clearly, loving renunciation, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paññāvisiṭṭhaṃ labhate anuttaraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">gaining wisdom that’s supreme and eminent, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappoti bodhiṃ varabhūrimedhaso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the one of superb, vast intelligence attains awakening.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">13. Suvaṇṇavaṇṇalakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">13. Golden Skin </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">akkodhano ahosi anupāyāsabahulo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He wasn’t irritable or bad-tempered. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahumpi vutto samāno nābhisajji na kuppi na byāpajji na patitthīyi, na kopañca dosañca appaccayañca pātvākāsi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even when heavily criticized he didn’t lose his temper, become annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dātā ca ahosi sukhumānaṃ mudukānaṃ attharaṇānaṃ pāvuraṇānaṃ khomasukhumānaṃ kappāsikasukhumānaṃ koseyyasukhumānaṃ kambalasukhumānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He donated soft and fine mats and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suvaṇṇavaṇṇo hoti kañcanasannibhattaco. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he is gold colored; his skin has a golden sheen. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī hoti sukhumānaṃ mudukānaṃ attharaṇānaṃ pāvuraṇānaṃ khomasukhumānaṃ kappāsikasukhumānaṃ koseyyasukhumānaṃ kambalasukhumānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He obtains soft and fine mats and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī hoti sukhumānaṃ mudukānaṃ attharaṇānaṃ pāvuraṇānaṃ khomasukhumānaṃ kappāsikasukhumānaṃ koseyyasukhumānaṃ kambalasukhumānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He obtains soft and fine mats and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Akkodhañca adhiṭṭhahi adāsi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Dedicated to good will, he gave gifts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dānañca vatthāni sukhumāni succhavīni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">In an earlier life he poured forth cloth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purimatarabhave ṭhito abhivissaji, </span></p>
<p class="p3">fine and soft to touch, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahimiva suro abhivassaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like a god pouring rain on this broad earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ katvāna ito cuto dibbaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So doing he passed from here to heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upapajji sukataphalavipākamanubhutvā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed the fruits of deeds well done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kanakatanusannibho idhābhibhavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here he wins a figure of gold, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suravarataroriva indo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like Inda, the finest of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gehañcāvasati naro apabbajja, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If that man stays in the house, not wishing to go forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Micchaṃ mahatimahiṃ anusāsati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he conquers and rules this vast, broad earth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasayha sahidha sattaratanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He obtains abundant excellent cloth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilabhati vimalasukhumacchaviṃ suciñca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">so fine and soft to touch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lābhī acchādanavatthamokkhapāvuraṇānaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He receives robes, cloth, and the finest garments </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavati yadi anāgāriyataṃ upeti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">if he chooses the life gone forth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahito purimakataphalaṃ anubhavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For he still partakes of past deed’s fruit; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na bhavati katassa panāso”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">what’s been done is never lost.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">14. Kosohitavatthaguyhalakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">14. Retracted Privates </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cirappanaṭṭhe sucirappavāsino ñātimitte suhajje sakhino samānetā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He reunited long-lost and long-separated relatives, friends, loved ones, and companions. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mātarampi puttena samānetā ahosi, puttampi mātarā samānetā ahosi, pitarampi puttena samānetā ahosi, puttampi pitarā samānetā ahosi, bhātarampi bhātarā samānetā ahosi, bhātarampi bhaginiyā samānetā ahosi, bhaginimpi bhātarā samānetā ahosi, bhaginimpi bhaginiyā samānetā ahosi, samaṅgīkatvā ca abbhanumoditā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He reunited mother with child and child with mother; father with child and child with father; brother with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, and sister with sister, bringing them together with rejoicing. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">kosohitavatthaguyho hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his private parts are retracted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtaputto hoti, parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has many sons, over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtaputto hoti, anekasahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has many sons, many thousands of sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pure puratthā purimāsu jātisu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In olden days, in past lives, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cirappanaṭṭhe sucirappavāsino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he reunited long-lost </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātī suhajje sakhino samānayi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">and long-separated friends and family, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṅgikatvā anumoditā ahu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">bringing them together with joy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena kammena divaṃ samakkami, </span></p>
<p class="p3">By means of these deeds he went to heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhañca khiḍḍāratiyo ca anvabhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed happiness and merriment. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tato cavitvā punarāgato idha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">After passing away from there to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kosohitaṃ vindati vatthachādiyaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his private parts are retracted. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtaputto bhavatī tathāvidho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Such a one has many sons, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassañca bhavanti atrajā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">over a thousand descendants, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sūrā ca vīrā ca amittatāpanā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">valiant and heroic, devastating foes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihissa pītiṃ jananā piyaṃvadā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">a layman’s joy, speaking kindly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahūtarā pabbajitassa iriyato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he lives the renunciate life </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavanti puttā vacanānusārino; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has even more sons following his word. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihissa vā pabbajitassa vā puna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As householder or renunciate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ lakkhaṇaṃ jāyati tadatthajotakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">that’s the meaning shown by this mark.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭhamabhāṇavāro niṭṭhito. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The first recitation section is finished. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">15–16. Parimaṇḍalaanonamajaṇṇuparimasanalakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">15–16. Equal Proportions and Touching the Knees </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">mahājanasaṅgahaṃ samekkhamāno samaṃ jānāti sāmaṃ jānāti, purisaṃ jānāti purisavisesaṃ jānāti: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He regarded the gathered population equally. He knew what they had in common and what was their own. He knew each person, and he knew the distinctions between people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘ayamidamarahati ayamidamarahatī’ti tattha tattha purisavisesakaro ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">In each case, he made appropriate distinctions between people: ‘This one deserves that; that one deserves this.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Nigrodhaparimaṇḍalo ca hoti, ṭhitakoyeva ca anonamanto ubhohi pāṇitalehi jaṇṇukāni parimasati parimajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree; and when standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the knees. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aḍḍho hoti mahaddhano mahābhogo pahūtajātarūparajato pahūtavittūpakaraṇo pahūtadhanadhañño paripuṇṇakosakoṭṭhāgāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, lots of money and grain, and a full treasury and storehouses. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aḍḍho hoti mahaddhano mahābhogo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is rich, affluent, and wealthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni dhanāni honti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has these kinds of wealth: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">saddhādhanaṃ sīladhanaṃ hiridhanaṃ ottappadhanaṃ sutadhanaṃ cāgadhanaṃ paññādhanaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wealth of faith, ethical conduct, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Tuliya paṭivicaya cintayitvā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Observing the many people in a community, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahājanasaṅgahanaṃ samekkhamāno; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he weighed, evaluated, and judged each case: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayamidamarahati tattha tattha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This one deserves that.’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Purisavisesakaro pure ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s how he used to draw distinctions between people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahiñca pana ṭhito anonamanto, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Now standing without bending </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Phusati karehi ubhohi jaṇṇukāni; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he can touch his knees with both hands. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahiruhaparimaṇḍalo ahosi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the remaining ripening of the fruit of good deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucaritakammavipākasesakena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his circumference was that of a great tree. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuvividhanimittalakkhaṇaññū, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Learned experts in the many different </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atinipuṇā manujā byākariṃsu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">signs and marks prophesied: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuvividhā gihīnaṃ arahāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘The young prince will obtain </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭilabhati daharo susu kumāro. </span></p>
<p class="p3">many different things that householders deserve. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha ca mahīpatissa kāmabhogī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here there are many suitable pleasures </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihipatirūpakā bahū bhavanti; </span></p>
<p class="p3">for the ruler of the land to enjoy as householder. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi ca jahati sabbakāmabhogaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Labhati anuttaraṃ uttamadhanaggan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he will gain the supreme, highest peak of wealth.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">17–19. Sīhapubbaddhakāyāditilakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">17–19. A Lion’s Chest, Etc. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahujanassa atthakāmo ahosi hitakāmo phāsukāmo yogakkhemakāmo: </span></p>
<p class="p3">He desired the good, the welfare, the comfort, and sanctuary of the people, thinking: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">‘kintime saddhāya vaḍḍheyyuṃ, sīlena vaḍḍheyyuṃ, sutena vaḍḍheyyuṃ, cāgena vaḍḍheyyuṃ, dhammena vaḍḍheyyuṃ, paññāya vaḍḍheyyuṃ, dhanadhaññena vaḍḍheyyuṃ, khettavatthunā vaḍḍheyyuṃ, dvipadacatuppadehi vaḍḍheyyuṃ, puttadārehi vaḍḍheyyuṃ, dāsakammakaraporisehi vaḍḍheyyuṃ, ñātīhi vaḍḍheyyuṃ, mittehi vaḍḍheyyuṃ, bandhavehi vaḍḍheyyun’ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘How might they flourish in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, teachings, and wisdom; in wealth and grain, fields and land, birds and beasts, children and partners; in bondservants, workers, and staff; in family, friends, and kin?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni tīṇi mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these three marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sīhapubbaddhakāyo ca hoti citantaraṃso ca samavaṭṭakkhandho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his chest is like that of a lion; the gap between the shoulder-blades is filled in; and his torso is cylindrical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparihānadhammo hoti, na parihāyati dhanadhaññena khettavatthunā dvipadacatuppadehi puttadārehi dāsakammakaraporisehi ñātīhi mittehi bandhavehi, na parihāyati sabbasampattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s not liable to decline. He doesn’t decline in wealth and grain, fields and land, birds and beasts, children and partners; in bondservants, workers, and staff; in family, friends, and kin. He doesn’t decline in any of his accomplishments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Aparihānadhammo hoti, na parihāyati saddhāya sīlena sutena cāgena paññāya, na parihāyati sabbasampattiyā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s not liable to decline. He doesn’t decline in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. He doesn’t decline in any of his accomplishments. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saddhāya sīlena sutena buddhiyā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“His wish was this: ‘How may others not decline </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cāgena dhammena bahūhi sādhuhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in faith, ethics, learning, and intelligence, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhanena dhaññena ca khettavatthunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in generosity, teachings, and much good else, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puttehi dārehi catuppadehi ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">in coin and corn, fields and lands, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ñātīhi mittehi ca bandhavehi ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in children, partners, and livestock, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Balena vaṇṇena sukhena cūbhayaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in family, friends, and kin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kathaṃ na hāyeyyuṃ pareti icchati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">in health, and both beauty and happiness?’ </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atthassa middhī ca panābhikaṅkhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">And so he ever desired their success. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa sīhapubbaddhasusaṇṭhito ahu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His chest was full like that of a lion, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samavaṭṭakhandho ca citantaraṃso; </span></p>
<p class="p3">his shoulder-gap filled in, and torso cylindrical. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbe suciṇṇena katena kammunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to the well-done deeds of the past, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahāniyaṃ pubbanimittamassa taṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he had that portent of non-decline. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihīpi dhaññena dhanena vaḍḍhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even as layman he grows in corn and coin, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Puttehi dārehi catuppadehi ca; </span></p>
<p class="p3">in wives, children, and livestock. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcano pabbajito anuttaraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But once gone forth, owning nothing, he attains </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pappoti bodhiṃ asahānadhammatan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the supreme awakening which may never decline.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">20. Rasaggasaggitālakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">20. Excellent Sense of Taste </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sattānaṃ aviheṭhakajātiko ahosi pāṇinā vā leḍḍunā vā daṇḍena vā satthena vā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He would never hurt any sentient being with fists, stones, rods, or swords. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati, rasaggasaggī hoti, uddhaggāssa rasaharaṇīyo gīvāya jātā honti samābhivāhiniyo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: he has an excellent sense of taste. Taste-buds are produced in the throat for the tongue-tip and dispersed evenly. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appābādho hoti appātaṅko, samavepākiniyā gahaṇiyā samannāgato nātisītāya nāccuṇhāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is rarely ill or unwell. His stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appābādho hoti appātaṅko samavepākiniyā gahaṇiyā samannāgato nātisītāya nāccuṇhāya majjhimāya padhānakkhamāya. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He is rarely ill or unwell. His stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na pāṇidaṇḍehi panātha leḍḍunā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Not with fist or rod or stone, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Satthena vā maraṇavadhena vā pana; </span></p>
<p class="p3">or sword or beating to death, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbādhanāya paritajjanāya vā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">or by bondage or threats </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na heṭhayī janatamaheṭhako ahu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">did he ever harm anyone. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Teneva so sugatimupecca modati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">For that very reason he rejoiced in heaven after passing away, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhapphalaṃ kariya sukhāni vindati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">finding happiness as a fruit of happy deeds. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samojasā rasaharaṇī susaṇṭhitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">With taste-buds well formed and even, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idhāgato labhati rasaggasaggitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">on his return here he has an excellent sense of taste. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tenāhu naṃ atinipuṇā vicakkhaṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s why the clever visionaries said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ayaṃ naro sukhabahulo bhavissati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘This man will have much happiness </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihissa vā pabbajitassa vā puna, </span></p>
<p class="p3">as householder or renunciate. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ lakkhaṇaṃ bhavati tadatthajotakan”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s the meaning shown by this mark.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">21–22. Abhinīlanettagopakhumalakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">21–22. Deep Blue Eyes </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">na ca visaṭaṃ, na ca visāci, na ca pana viceyya pekkhitā, ujuṃ tathā pasaṭamujumano, piyacakkhunā bahujanaṃ udikkhitā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When looking at others he didn’t glare, look askance, or avert his eyes. Being straightforward, he reached out to others with straightforward intentions, looking at people with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinīlanetto ca hoti gopakhumo ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his eyes are deep blue, and he has eyelashes like a cow’s. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato, sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyadassano hoti bahuno janassa, piyo hoti manāpo brāhmaṇagahapatikānaṃ negamajānapadānaṃ gaṇakamahāmattānaṃ anīkaṭṭhānaṃ dovārikānaṃ amaccānaṃ pārisajjānaṃ rājūnaṃ bhogiyānaṃ kumārānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The people look on him with kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyadassano hoti bahuno janassa, piyo hoti manāpo bhikkhūnaṃ bhikkhunīnaṃ upāsakānaṃ upāsikānaṃ devānaṃ manussānaṃ asurānaṃ nāgānaṃ gandhabbānaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">The people look on him with kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved to the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na ca visaṭaṃ na ca visāci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“With not a glare or glance askance, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na ca pana viceyyapekkhitā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">nor averting of the eyes; </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ujuṃ tathā pasaṭamujumano, </span></p>
<p class="p3">straightforward, he reached out straightforwardly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyacakkhunā bahujanaṃ udikkhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">looking at people with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sugatīsu so phalavipākaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anubhavati tattha modati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and result, rejoicing there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha ca pana bhavati gopakhumo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But here he has a cow’s eyelashes, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhinīlanettanayano sudassano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and eyes deep blue so fair to see. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhiyogino ca nipuṇā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Many soothsayers, men clever </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahū pana nimittakovidā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and learned in prognostic texts, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukhumanayanakusalā manujā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">expert in cow-like lashes, indicated he’d </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyadassanoti abhiniddisanti naṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">be looked upon with kindly eyes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyadassano gihīpi santo ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even as a householder he’d be regarded kindly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhavati bahujanapiyāyito; </span></p>
<p class="p3">beloved of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi ca na bhavati gihī samaṇo hoti, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he becomes an ascetic, not lay, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Piyo bahūnaṃ sokanāsano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as destroyer of sorrow he’ll be loved by many.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">23. Uṇhīsasīsalakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">23. Head Like a Turban </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">bahujanapubbaṅgamo ahosi kusalesu dhammesu bahujanapāmokkho kāyasucarite vacīsucarite manosucarite dānasaṃvibhāge sīlasamādāne uposathupavāse matteyyatāya petteyyatāya sāmaññatāya brahmaññatāya kule jeṭṭhāpacāyitāya aññataraññataresu ca adhikusalesu dhammesu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was the leader and forerunner of people in skillful behaviors such as good conduct by way of body, speech, giving and sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect to mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the family, and various other things pertaining to skillful behaviors. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati—</span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">uṇhīsasīso hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his head is shaped like a turban. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāssa jano anvāyiko hoti, brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large following of brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāssa jano anvāyiko hoti, bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a large following of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Pubbaṅgamo sucaritesu ahu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Among people of good conduct, he was the leader, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammesu dhammacariyābhirato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">devoted to a life of principle among the principled. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvāyiko bahujanassa ahu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The people followed him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saggesu vedayittha puññaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and he experienced the fruit of good deeds in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditvā so sucaritassa phalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having experienced that fruit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṇhīsasīsattamidhajjhagamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he acquires a head shaped like a turban. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu byañjananimittadharā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">The experts in omens and signs prophesied: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbaṅgamo bahujanaṃ hessati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘He will be leader of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭibhogiyā manujesu idha, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Among people then, as before, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pubbeva tassa abhiharanti tadā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">they will bring presents for him. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi khattiyo bhavati bhūmipati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Paṭihārakaṃ bahujane labhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll gain the service of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha cepi pabbajati so manujo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if that man goes forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dhammesu hoti paguṇo visavī; </span></p>
<p class="p3">he’ll be sophisticated, proficient in the teachings. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassānusāsaniguṇābhirato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Devoted to the virtues of his instruction, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anvāyiko bahujano bhavatī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the people will become his followers.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">24–25. Ekekalomatāuṇṇālakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">24–25. One Hair Per Pore, and a Tuft </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">musāvādaṃ pahāya musāvādā paṭivirato ahosi, saccavādī saccasandho theto paccayiko avisaṃvādako lokassa. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He refrained from lying. He spoke the truth and stuck to the truth. He was honest and trustworthy, and didn’t trick the world with his words. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekekalomo ca hoti, uṇṇā ca bhamukantare jātā hoti odātā mudutūlasannibhā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his hairs grow one per pore, and between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like cotton-wool. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato, sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāssa jano upavattati, brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has many close adherents among the brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Mahāssa jano upavattati, bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has many close adherents among the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Saccappaṭiñño purimāsu jātisu, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“In past lives he was true to his promise, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Advejjhavāco alikaṃ vivajjayi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">with no forked tongue, he shunned lies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na so visaṃvādayitāpi kassaci, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He never broke his word to anyone, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhūtena tacchena tathena bhāsayi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but spoke what was true, real, and factual. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Setā susukkā mudutūlasannibhā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">A tuft so very white like cotton-wool </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṇṇā sujātā bhamukantare ahu; </span></p>
<p class="p3">grew prettily between his eyebrows. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Na lomakūpesu duve ajāyisuṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And never two, but only one, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ekekalomūpacitaṅgavā ahu. </span></p>
<p class="p3">hair grew in each of his pores. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ lakkhaṇaññū bahavo samāgatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Many soothsayers learned in marks </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu uppādanimittakovidā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and expert in signs gathered and prophesied: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Uṇṇā ca lomā ca yathā susaṇṭhitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘One like this, with tuft and hair so well-formed, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Upavattatī īdisakaṃ bahujjano. </span></p>
<p class="p3">will have many as his close adherents. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihimpi santaṃ upavattatī jano, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even as householder many people will follow him, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahu puratthāpakatena kammunā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">due to the power of deeds in the past. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Akiñcanaṃ pabbajitaṃ anuttaraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But once gone forth, owning nothing, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddhampi santaṃ upavattati jano”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">as Buddha the people will follow him.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">26–27. Cattālīsaaviraḷadantalakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">26–27. Forty Gapless Teeth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pisuṇaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pisuṇāya vācāya paṭivirato ahosi. Ito sutvā na amutra akkhātā imesaṃ bhedāya, amutra vā sutvā na imesaṃ akkhātā amūsaṃ bhedāya, iti bhinnānaṃ vā sandhātā, sahitānaṃ vā anuppadātā, samaggārāmo samaggarato samagganandī samaggakaraṇiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He refrained from divisive speech. He didn’t repeat in one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead, he reconciled those who were divided, supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cattālīsadanto ca hoti aviraḷadanto ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has forty teeth, and his teeth have no gaps. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhejjapariso hoti, abhejjāssa honti parisā, brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue cannot be divided. This includes brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhejjapariso hoti, abhejjāssa honti parisā, bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue cannot be divided. This includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Vebhūtiyaṃ sahitabhedakāriṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He spoke no untruth causing friends to split, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhedappavaḍḍhanavivādakāriṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">creating disputes that foster division, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalahappavaḍḍhanaākiccakāriṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">acting improperly by fostering quarrels, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahitānaṃ bhedajananiṃ na bhaṇi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">creating division among friends. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avivādavaḍḍhanakariṃ sugiraṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He spoke kind words to foster harmony, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bhinnānusandhijananiṃ abhaṇi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">uniting those who are divided. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Kalahaṃ janassa panudī samaṅgī, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eliminated quarrels among the people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sahitehi nandati pamodati ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">rejoicing together with the united. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sugatīsu so phalavipākaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Anubhavati tattha modati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">and result, rejoicing there. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dantā idha honti aviraḷā sahitā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Here his teeth are gapless, close together, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caturo dasassa mukhajā susaṇṭhitā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">forty standing upright in his mouth. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Yadi khattiyo bhavati bhūmipati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avibhediyāssa parisā bhavati; </span></p>
<p class="p3">his assembly will be indivisible. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇo ca hoti virajo vimalo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">And as an ascetic, stainless, immaculate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parisāssa hoti anugatā acalā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his assembly will follow him, unshakable.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">28–29. Pahūtajivhābrahmassaralakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">28–29. A Large Tongue and the Voice of Brahmā </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">pharusaṃ vācaṃ pahāya pharusāya vācāya paṭivirato ahosi. Yā sā vācā nelā kaṇṇasukhā pemanīyā hadayaṅgamā porī bahujanakantā bahujanamanāpā, tathārūpiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He refrained from harsh speech. He spoke in a way that’s mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pahūtajivho ca hoti brahmassaro ca karavīkabhāṇī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he has a large tongue, and the voice of Brahmā, like a cuckoo’s call. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādeyyavāco hoti, ādiyantissa vacanaṃ brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a persuasive voice. His words are persuasive to brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādeyyavāco hoti, ādiyantissa vacanaṃ bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has a persuasive voice. His words are persuasive to monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Akkosabhaṇḍanavihesakāriṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He never spoke a loud harsh word, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ubbādhikaṃ bahujanappamaddanaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">insulting, quarrelsome, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abāḷhaṃ giraṃ so na bhaṇi pharusaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">causing harm, rude, crushing the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Madhuraṃ bhaṇi susaṃhitaṃ sakhilaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His speech was sweet, helpful, and kind. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manaso piyā hadayagāminiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He uttered words dear to the mind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācā so erayati kaṇṇasukhā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">going to the heart, pleasing to the ear. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vācāsuciṇṇaphalamanubhavi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He enjoyed the fruit of his good verbal conduct, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Saggesu vedayatha puññaphalaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">experiencing the fruit of good deeds in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Veditvā so sucaritassa phalaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having experienced that fruit, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Brahmassarattamidhamajjhagamā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">on his return to here he acquired the voice of Brahmā. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Jivhāssa hoti vipulā puthulā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">His tongue was long and wide, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādeyyavākyavacano bhavati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and his speech was persuasive. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gihinopi ijjhati yathā bhaṇato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Even as householder his speech brings prosperity. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ce pabbajati so manujo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if that man goes forth, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ādiyantissa vacanaṃ janatā, </span></p>
<p class="p3">speaking often to the people, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Bahuno bahuṃ subhaṇitaṃ bhaṇato”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">they’ll be persuaded by his fair words.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">30. Sīhahanulakkhaṇaṃ </span></p>
<p class="p3">30. A Lion-Like Jaw </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">samphappalāpaṃ pahāya samphappalāpā paṭivirato ahosi kālavādī bhūtavādī atthavādī dhammavādī vinayavādī, nidhānavatiṃ vācaṃ bhāsitā ahosi kālena sāpadesaṃ pariyantavatiṃ atthasaṃhitaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He refrained from talking nonsense. His words were timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He said things at the right time which were valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">so tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imaṃ mahāpurisalakkhaṇaṃ paṭilabhati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained this mark: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">sīhahanu hoti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his jaw is like that of a lion. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tena lakkhaṇena samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning monarch. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appadhaṃsiyo hoti kenaci manussabhūtena paccatthikena paccāmittena. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He can’t be destroyed by any human foe or enemy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati … pe … </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Appadhaṃsiyo hoti abbhantarehi vā bāhirehi vā paccatthikehi paccāmittehi, rāgena vā dosena vā mohena vā samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmiṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He can’t be destroyed by any foe or enemy whether internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or by anyone in the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Na samphappalāpaṃ na muddhataṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Neither nonsensical nor silly, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Avikiṇṇavacanabyappatho ahosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">his way of speaking was never loose. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahitamapi ca apanudi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eliminated what was useless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitamapi ca bahujanasukhañca abhaṇi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and spoke for the welfare and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ katvā ito cuto divamupapajji, </span></p>
<p class="p3">So doing he passed from here to be reborn in heaven, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sukataphalavipākamanubhosi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Caviya punaridhāgato samāno, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Passing away, on his return to here, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dvidugamavaratarahanuttamalattha. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he gained a jaw like the finest of beasts. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā hoti suduppadhaṃsiyo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He became a king so very hard to defeat, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Manujindo manujādhipati mahānubhāvo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a mighty lord and ruler of men. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tidivapuravarasamo bhavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He was equal to the best in the city of the Three and Thirty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suravarataroriva indo. </span></p>
<p class="p3">like Inda, the finest of gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Gandhabbāsurayakkharakkhasebhi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">One such as that is not easily beaten by fairies, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Surehi na hi bhavati suppadhaṃsiyo; </span></p>
<p class="p3">demons, spirits, monsters, or gods. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tathatto yadi bhavati tathāvidho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">If he becomes of such a kind, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idha disā ca paṭidisā ca vidisā cā”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he illuminates the quarters and in-between.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">31–32. Samadantasusukkadāṭhālakkhaṇāni </span></p>
<p class="p3">31–32. Even and White Teeth </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Yampi, bhikkhave, tathāgato purimaṃ jātiṃ purimaṃ bhavaṃ purimaṃ niketaṃ pubbe manussabhūto samāno </span></p>
<p class="p3">“Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human being. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">micchājīvaṃ pahāya sammāājīvena jīvikaṃ kappesi, tulākūṭakaṃsakūṭamānakūṭaukkoṭanavañcananikatisāciyogachedanavadhabandhanaviparāmosaālopasahasākārā paṭivirato ahosi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He gave up wrong livelihood and earned a living by right livelihood. He refrained from falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tassa kammassa kaṭattā upacitattā ussannattā vipulattā kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Due to performing, accumulating, heaping up, and amassing those deeds, when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tattha aññe deve dasahi ṭhānehi adhigaṇhāti dibbena āyunā dibbena vaṇṇena dibbena sukhena dibbena yasena dibbena ādhipateyyena dibbehi rūpehi dibbehi saddehi dibbehi gandhehi dibbehi rasehi dibbehi phoṭṭhabbehi. </span></p>
<p class="p3">There he surpassed the other gods in ten respects: divine life span, beauty, happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tato cuto itthattaṃ āgato samāno imāni dve mahāpurisalakkhaṇāni paṭilabhati, samadanto ca hoti susukkadāṭho ca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">When he came back to this state of existence he obtained these two marks: his teeth are even and perfectly white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So tehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato sace agāraṃ ajjhāvasati, rājā hoti cakkavattī dhammiko dhammarājā cāturanto vijitāvī janapadatthāvariyappatto sattaratanasamannāgato. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassimāni satta ratanāni bhavanti, seyyathidaṃ—</span></p>
<p class="p3">He has the following seven treasures: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">cakkaratanaṃ hatthiratanaṃ assaratanaṃ maṇiratanaṃ itthiratanaṃ gahapatiratanaṃ pariṇāyakaratanameva sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the treasurer, and the counselor as the seventh treasure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Parosahassaṃ kho panassa puttā bhavanti sūrā vīraṅgarūpā parasenappamaddanā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">So imaṃ pathaviṃ sāgarapariyantaṃ akhilamanimittamakaṇṭakaṃ iddhaṃ phītaṃ khemaṃ sivaṃ nirabbudaṃ adaṇḍena asatthena dhammena abhivijiya ajjhāvasati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">After conquering this land girt by sea—free of harassment by bandits, successful and prosperous, safe, blessed, and untroubled—he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as king? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suciparivāro hoti sucissa honti parivārā brāhmaṇagahapatikā negamajānapadā gaṇakamahāmattā anīkaṭṭhā dovārikā amaccā pārisajjā rājāno bhogiyā kumārā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue is pure. This includes brahmins and householders, people of town and country, treasury officials, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, counselors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rājā samāno idaṃ labhati. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as king. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sace kho pana agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajati, arahaṃ hoti sammāsambuddho loke vivaṭṭacchado. </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno kiṃ labhati? </span></p>
<p class="p3">And what does he obtain as Buddha? </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suciparivāro hoti, sucissa honti parivārā, bhikkhū bhikkhuniyo upāsakā upāsikāyo devā manussā asurā nāgā gandhabbā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">His retinue is pure. This includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, demons, dragons, and fairies. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Buddho samāno idaṃ labhati”. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That’s what he obtains as Buddha.” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Etamatthaṃ bhagavā avoca. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tatthetaṃ vuccati: </span></p>
<p class="p3">On this it is said: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">“Micchājīvañca avassaji samena vuttiṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">“He abandoned wrong livelihood, and created </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucinā so janayittha dhammikena; </span></p>
<p class="p3">a way of life that’s fair, pure, and just. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Ahitamapi ca apanudi, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He eliminated what was useless, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitamapi ca bahujanasukhañca acari. </span></p>
<p class="p3">and lived for the welfare and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sagge vedayati naro sukhapphalāni, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Having done what’s praised by the clever, the wise, and the good, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Karitvā nipuṇebhi vidūhi sabbhi; </span></p>
<p class="p3">that man experienced the fruit in heaven. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vaṇṇitāni tidivapuravarasamo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Equal to the best in the heaven of Three and Thirty, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Abhiramati ratikhiḍḍāsamaṅgī. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he enjoyed himself with pleasure and play. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Laddhāna mānusakaṃ bhavaṃ tato, </span></p>
<p class="p3">From there he passed back to a human life. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Cavitvāna sukataphalavipākaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">With the remaining ripening of the fruit of good deeds, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sesakena paṭilabhati lapanajaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">he obtained teeth that are even, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samamapi sucisusukkaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">gleaming, bright, and white. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Taṃ veyyañjanikā samāgatā bahavo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Many soothsayers regarded as wise men </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Byākaṃsu nipuṇasammatā manujā; </span></p>
<p class="p3">gathered and predicted of him: </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sucijanaparivāragaṇo bhavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">‘With twice-born teeth so even, so white, so clean and bright </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Dijasamasukkasucisobhanadanto. </span></p>
<p class="p3">his retinue will be so pure. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Rañño hoti bahujano, </span></p>
<p class="p3">As king, his people will also be pure, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Suciparivāro mahatiṃ mahiṃ anusāsato; </span></p>
<p class="p3">when he rules having conquered this earth so broad. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Pasayha na ca janapadatudanaṃ, </span></p>
<p class="p3">They won’t harm the country, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Hitamapi ca bahujanasukhañca caranti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">but will live for the welfare and happiness of the people. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Atha ce pabbajati bhavati vipāpo, </span></p>
<p class="p3">But if he goes forth he’ll be an ascetic free of ill, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Samaṇo samitarajo vivaṭṭacchado; </span></p>
<p class="p3">his passions quelled, the veil drawn back. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Vigatadarathakilamatho, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Rid of stress and weariness, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Imamapi ca paramapi ca passati lokaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3">he sees this world and the next. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Tassovādakarā bahugihī ca pabbajitā ca, </span></p>
<p class="p3">Those who do his bidding, both lay and renunciate, </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Asuciṃ garahitaṃ dhunanti pāpaṃ; </span></p>
<p class="p3">shake off wickedness, impure and blameworthy. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Sa hi sucibhi parivuto bhavati, </span></p>
<p class="p3">He’s surrounded by pure people, who dispel </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Malakhilakalikilese panudehī”ti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">stains, callousness, sin, and corruptions.’” </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Idamavoca bhagavā. </span></p>
<p class="p3">That is what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Attamanā te bhikkhū bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinandunti. </span></p>
<p class="p3">Satisfied, the mendicants were happy with what the Buddha said. </p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>
<p class="p3"><span class="t5">Lakkhaṇasuttaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ sattamaṃ. </span></p>
<p class="p3"/>
<p class="p3"><span class="t1"> </span></p>

</body>
</html>
